---
tags:
- alg
- rtg-2025
---

Using quotients we can make the notion of [[Abstract algebra --- math-171/notes/Dihedral groups and generators#_definition _ generator|group presentation]] precise. First, we need to define free groups, which have the minimal possible presentation.

##### _definition:_ free group

The free group generated by a set $S$ is $F_{S}$, a group with an injection $s : S \to F_{S}$ satisfying the following universal property — for any group $G$ and function $f : S \to G$, there is a unique [[Abstract algebra --- math-171/notes/Group homomorphisms#_definition _ group homomorphisms|homomorphisms]] $\varphi$ such that $f = \varphi \circ s$.

The free group can be shown to exist by constructing the set of all "reduced words" in the alphabet $S \cup S^{-1}$ and defining an algorithm for reducing the concatenation of words to give the group operation.

Once we have a free group, we can get group presentations as their quotients.

##### _definition:_ group presentation, generators, relators

Given sets $S$ and $R \subseteq F_{S}$, the group presentation $\left< S \mid R \right>$ is the group $F_{S} / \overline{R}$ where $\overline{R}$ is the normal closure of $R$ — the smallest [[Abstract algebra --- math-171/notes/Normal subgroups#_definition _ normal subgroups|normal subgroup]] containing $R$.

If $G \cong \left< S \mid R \right>$ we say $G$ has presentation $\left< S \mid R \right>$. We say the elements of $S$ generate $G$ and the elements of $R$ are called relators.

In practice we don't write $R$ as relators but as relations $x = y$ which can be transformed into this formal $R$ by $x = y \iff xy^{-1} = 1$.

Also, if we have a subset $S \subseteq G$, then the group generated by $S$ in $G$, denoted $\left< S \right> \le G$, is the group generated by $S$ with all the relators inherited for elements of $S$ from $G$. That is, it is $\left< S \mid R \right>$ where $R$ is the kernel of the unique map $F_{S} \to G$ with $s \mapsto s$ for all $s \in S$.

##### _examples:_ group presentations

- The free group generated by $S$ has presentation $\left< S \right>$.
- $\mathbb{Z}^{2}$ has presentation $\left< a, b \mid a b a^{-1} b^{-1} \right>$. It is the free abelian group with two generators.
- Every group has a (very inefficient) presentation — for $G$ a group choose $S = G$, and for each pair $g_{1} g_{2} \in S$ with $g_{1} g_{2} = h$ in $G$, choose $g_{1} g_{2} h^{-1} \in R$.
- The [[Abstract algebra --- math-171/notes/Group combinatorics and symmetric groups#_proposition _ every permutation is the composition of transpositions|symmetric group is generated by transpositions]] and thus $\mathfrak S_{n} = \left< S \mid R \right>$ where $S$ is any set of cardinality $\binom{n}{2}$ and $R = \{ \sigma^{2} \mid \sigma \in S \} \cup \{ \sigma \tau \sigma ^{-1} \tau ^{-1} \mid \sigma, \tau \text{ disjoint} \}$.

Note that the last two give in two different ways that every group is a quotient of a free group. This is one reason that free groups are of such importance.