---
tags:
- math-145/11
- uc-2026/alg-top/1
- alg-top
- peter-may
---

Simplicial complexes are simple piecewise-linear topological spaces that we can use to probe topological spaces in general. They build up from points, to triangles, to tetrahedra, and so on, by describing any set $\{ 1, 2, \dots, n \}$ as the simplest $n$-tope and considering all of its subsets as lower dimensional faces.

##### _definition:_ simplicial complex, simplex

A **simplicial complex** $X$ comprises a non-empty set $V(X)$ of **vertices** of $X$, and a set of finite subsets of $V(X)$, denoted $X$ by abuse of notation, that is closed under taking subsets. That is, if $\sigma \subseteq \tau \subseteq V(X)$ and $\tau \in X$, then $\sigma \in X$.

Each $\sigma \in X$ is a **simplex**.

The simplicial complex generated by $\sigma_{1}, \dots, \sigma_{n}$ is $\left< \sigma_{1}, \dots, \sigma_{n} \right>$ — the smallest simplicial complex containing $\{ \sigma_{1}, \dots, \sigma_{n} \}$.

---

##### _definition:_ face, coface

Given a simplicial complex $X$, and simplices $\sigma, \tau \in X$, if $\sigma \subseteq \tau$ then $\sigma$ is a face of $\tau$ and $\tau$ is a coface of $\sigma$.

---

##### _definition:_ $k$-skeleton

The **$k$-skeleton** of a simplicial complex $X$ is the simplicial complex $X^{(k)}$ consisting of all $\sigma \in X$ such that $\# \sigma \leq k$.

### Some nice constructions

Simplicial complexes can be very pretty!

##### _example:_ orthoplexes

The $n$-orthoplex is the simplicial complex consists of $2n$ vertices and all sides that don't contain a "diagonal" $\{ -k, k \}$ — it is
$$
X_{n} = \{ \sigma \subseteq \{ \pm 1, \dots, \pm n \} \mid \{ -k, k \} \not \subseteq \sigma \}.
$$
---

##### _example:_ cones

A simplicial complex $C$ is a cone if there exists a vertex $*$ such that for all $\sigma \in C$ we have $\sigma \cup \{ * \} \in C$ for all $\sigma$. We can make any simplicial complex $X$ into a cone
$$
CX = \{ \sigma, \sigma \cup \{ * \} \mid \sigma \in X \}.
$$
This is a special case of the notion of a cone from [[Topology --- math-147/notes/Quotient and identification spaces#_definition _ cone|identification spaces]] in topology.

---

##### _example:_ relative cones

Relative cones allow us to just turn one subcomplex of a simplicial complex into a cone. That is, the relative cone is
$$
C(X, Y) = X \cup CY.
$$
Note that the union is not disjoint.

---

##### _example:_ double cone, suspension

The double cone, or suspension of $X$ is
$$
SX = \{ \sigma, \sigma \cup \{ *_{1} \}, \sigma \cup \{ *_{2} \} \mid \sigma \in X \}
$$
and since the relative cone does not disjoin the cone, we can describe the suspension as
$$
SX = C(CX, X).
$$

---

##### _example:_ nerve

The nerve is a simplicial complex that describes the intersection data of a family of sets. For a collection of (typically open) sets $\mathcal{O} = \{ U_{1}, \dots, U_{n} \}$, its nerve is
$$
\operatorname{nerve} \mathcal{O} = \left\{  \sigma \subseteq \{ 1, \dots, n \} \mid \bigcap_{i \in \sigma} U_{i} \neq \text{Ø}  \right\}.
$$
Note that this really is a simplicial complex — if $\{ n_{1}, \dots, n_{k} \} \in \operatorname{nerve} \mathcal{O}$, then $\bigcap_{i = 1}^k U_{n_{k}}$ is non-empty, and thus, so is any intersection over fewer indices

---

The nerve is in fact an unreasonably good model for a space.


##### _theorem:_ the nerve theorem (Čech, Borsuk, et c.)

If $\mathcal{O} = \{ U_{1}, \dots, U_{n} \}$ is a collection of convex sets in $\mathbb{R}^n$, then $\operatorname{nerve} \mathcal{O}$ has the same homotopy type as $\bigcup_{i = 1}^n U_{i}$.

---

##### _example:_ the Čech complex

Let $X \subseteq \mathbb{R}^n$ (typically a finite set of discrete points), $r > 0$, and $\mathcal{O} = \{ B(x, r) \mid x \in X \}$. Then $\operatorname{nerve} \mathcal{O}$ is the Čech complex of $X$, denoted $\operatorname{Č}(X)$.

---

##### _example:_ Vietoris–Rips complex

Let $X$ be a [[Analysis --- math-131/notes/Metric spaces#_definition_ metric space, metric|metric space]] (typically a discrete subset of a larger metric space, often $\mathbb{R}^n$). Then the Vietoris–Rips complex of $X$ of radius $r$ is 
$$
\operatorname{VR}(X, r) = \{ \sigma \subseteq X \mid \# \sigma < \infty, \operatorname{diam} \sigma < r  \}.
$$

---