---
tags:
- math-176/18
- math-176/20
- math-176/21
- math-176/23
- alg-geo
---

We've seen that if $C$ is a non-singular projective variety of dimension $d = 1$ and genus $g(C) = 0$, $C$ is either a line (for $e = 1$) or a conic section (for $e = 2$, by [[Algebraic Geometry --- math-176/notes/Pythagorean triples and conic sections#_theorem _ the general solution of a quadratic equation|the parametrisation we have for quadratrics]]). In either case $C \cong \mathbb{P}^1(F)$. Can we do something similar when $e = 3$? Almost!

First, note that we can reduce any cubic to an elliptic curve —

##### _proposition, definition:_ reducing cubics, elliptic curves

Say $\operatorname{char}(F) \neq 2, 3$. Consider the curve
$$
E : y^{2} + a_{1} xy + a_{3} y = x^{3} + a_{2} x^{2} + a_{4} x + a_{6}.
$$
written in Weierstrass form.
Then,
1) By a change of variables, $E$ is can be written as an elliptic curve in short Weierstrass form — $Y^{2} = X^{3} + AX + B$.
2) $E$ has at most one singular point $p$ and $p \neq (0 : 1 : 0)$.
3) $E$ is a [[Algebraic Geometry --- math-176/notes/Non-singular projective varieties#_definition _ non-singular projective variety|non-singular projective variety]] of dimension $1$ if and only if $\Delta(E) = -16(4A^3 + 27 B^{2}) \neq 0$.

If $\Delta(E) \neq 0$, we say $E$ is an elliptic curve.
###### _proof sketch:_

For 1), we can substitute
$$
\begin{split}
X & = x + \mu \\
Y & = y + \frac{a_{1} x + a_{3}}{2}
\end{split}
$$
for some $\mu \in F$. 

Complete the square in $y$ on the left hand side of the equation to get
$$
y^{2} + 2 \left( \frac{a_{1}x + a_{3}}{2}\right) y + \left( \frac{a_{1} x + a_{3}}{2} \right)^{2} = x^3 + a_{2} x^{2} + a_{4} x + a_{6} + \left( \frac{a_{1} x + a_{3}}{2} \right)^{2}.
$$
We choose $\mu$ so that the $X^{2}$ term vanishes — so as to depress the cubic (see the lecture notes for what exactly that should be). Now we have
$$
Y^{2} = X^{3} + AX + B
$$
as desired.

Consider $f(x, y) = x^3 + A x + B - y^{2}$. This corresponds to the homogenous polynomial $g(x_{1}, x_{2}, x_{0}) = x_{1}^{3} + A x_{1} x_{0}^{2} + B x_{0}^{3} - x_{2}^{2} x_{0}$. When might $g$ have a singular point?

$p = (p_{1} : p_{2} : p_{0})$ is only a singular point if $g(p) = 0$ and all $\frac{ \partial g }{ \partial x_{i} } = 0$ as well. That is, we need
$$
\begin{split}
0 & = p_{1}^{3} + A p_{1} x_{0}^{2} + B p_{0}^{3} - p_{2}^{2} p_{0} \\
0 & = 3 p_{1}^{2} + A p_{0}^{2} \\
0 & = - 2 p_{2} p_{0} \\
0 & = 2 A p_{1} p_{0} + 3 B p_{0}^{2} - p_{2}^{2}
\end{split}
$$
Notice that we must have $p_2 = 0$ or $p_{0} = 0$. If $p_{0} = 0$, then by the first equation the $3 p_{1}^{2} = 0$ and thus, $p_{1} = 0$. Also, by the third equation $- p_{2}^{2} = 0$ and thus, $p_{2} = 0$. Since $(0 : 0 : 0)$ isn't a point, this isn't possible. If $p_{2} = 0$, then by the last equation, $p_{0}(2 A p_{1} + 3 B p_{0}) = 0$, and since we've shown $p_{0} \neq 0$ already. Thus, $p = (3B : 0 : 2A )$.

Then plugging $p$ into $g$ and the other equations, we have that the $4A^{3} + 27 B^{2}$ must be $0$.

### The elliptic curve group

The points on an elliptic curve form a group ()

##### _proposition:_ elliptic curves are groups

Given an elliptic curve $E : y^{2} = x^{3} + ax + b$, the set of projective points
$$
E(F) = \{ (x_{1} : x_{2} : x_{0}) \in \mathbb{P}^2(F) \mid x_{2}^{2} x_{0} + x_{1}^{3} + a x_{1} x_{0}^{2} + b x_{0}^{3} \}.
$$
is an abelian group with $P + Q$ defined by $P, Q \in E(F)$ by the following procedure.
 — 
 1) Draw a (projective) line through $P$ and $Q$ and call the point where this (projective) line intersects the curve $R = P*Q$. If $P = Q$, draw the line tangent to $E$ at $P$.
 2) Define $P + Q = (P*Q)*O_{E}$
 
 Note that for $O_{E} = (0 : 1 : 0)$, $R * O_{E} = (x_{1} : x_{2} - a_{1} x_{1} - a_{3} : x_{0})$ where $a_{1}, a_{3}$ come from the original cubic. That is, $R*O_{E}$ is almost reflection in the $x$ axis. Thus, $-P = P*O_{E}$.

###### _proof:_

See notes (?)

##### _example:_ $E : y^{2} = x^{3} + 1$

Two rational points (points in $E(\mathbb{Q})$) on $E$ are $P = (0, 1)$ and $Q = (2, 3)$.

By computing, we can see $P + P = - P$, $Q + Q = - P$, and $P + Q \neq O_{E}$ (which we could deduce from the other equalities). Thus, $P$ has order $3$ and $Q$ has order $6$ with $P$ in the cyclic group generated by $Q$.

If we are willing to accept the (very hard) fact that these are all the points, we have $E(\mathbb{Q}) \cong Z_{6}$, generated by $Q$.

In the 1890s, Poincaré showed that $E(\mathbb{Q})$ is abelian and wondered if it's always finitely generated. In the 1920s Mordell showed that the conjecture is true! Often $E(\mathbb{Q})$ is called the Mordell group. Andre Weil generalised this to the case of abelian varieties of number fields which is called Mordell-Weil group.

Note then that we can apply the fundamental theorem of finitely generated abelian groups —

##### _theorem:_ the fundamental theorem of finitely generated abelian groups

For any finitely generated abelian group $G$, there is a non-negative integer $r$ such that
$$
G \cong G_{\text{tors}} \times \mathbb{Z}^r.
$$

Note that $G_{\text{tors}}$ must be finite.

This means that we can use the torsion group to describe what we call the rank of an elliptic curve —

##### _definition:_ rank of an elliptic curve

The rank of an elliptic curve is the non-negative integer $r$ such that
$$
E(\mathbb{Q}) \cong E(\mathbb{Q})_{\text{tors}} \times \mathbb{Z}^r.
$$

Note that $r = 0$ if and only if $E(\mathbb{Q})$ is finite.

After a long time spent conjecturing, Mazur classified the torsion subgroups of an elliptic curve —

##### _theorem:_ uniform boundedness for torsion points (Mazur)

If $E$ is an elliptic curve over $\mathbb{Q}$, there are exactly fifteen possibilities for the torsion subgroup. Either
$$
E(\mathbb{Q})_{\text{tors}} = Z_{N}
$$
for $N \in \{ 1, 2, \dots, 9, 10, 12 \}$ or
$$
E(\mathbb{Q})_{\text{tors}} = Z_{2} \times Z_{2N}
$$
for $N \in \{ 1, 2, 3, 4 \}$.

Lutz came up with a way to compute $E(\mathbb{Q})_{\text{tors}}$ concretely, given $E$.

While we have such nice theorems for $E(\mathbb{Q})_{\text{tors}}$, it's really difficult to say anything nice about rank. It's a famous conjecture that the rank of curves is unbounded, but most mathematicians now believe that the rank of curves can't be greater than $30$.

### Quartics

Recall that [[Algebraic Geometry --- math-176/notes/Elliptic integrals#Computing irrational integrals of quartics and cubics|we can rewrite the quartic]]
$$
y^{2} = (1 - x^{2})(1 - k^{2} x^{2})
$$
as a non-singular elliptic curve
$$
Y^2 = X^{3} + A X + B
$$as long as $k \neq 0, \pm 1$.

But then what is the genus of this curve? If we calculate using the degree of the first expression, we get $g = 3$, but using the elliptic curve expression, we get $g = 1$. What's happening is that the quartic is singular at $\infty$.

##### _proposition:_ $y^{2} = (1 - x^{2})(1 - k x^{2})$ is singular at infinity

The homogenous polynomial $f(x_{1} : x_{2} : x_{0}) = x_{2}^{2} x_{0}^{2} - (x_{0}^{2} - x_{1}^{2})(x_{0}^{2} - k^{2} x_{1}^{2})$ has derivative $0$ at $(0 : 1 : 0)$.

Another way of seeing that this is a problem point is by noticing that under the map that sends the quartic to the elliptic curve $(0 : 1 : 0)$ could correspond to two points — $(3(5k^{2} - 1), \pm_{5}4k(k^{2} - 1))$. Maybe we should try to split $(0 : 1 : 0)$ into two points?

We can do this by working in $\mathbb{P}^3(F)$ instead. Consider the embedding
$$
\begin{split}
\mathbb{P}^{2}(F) & \xhookrightarrow{} \mathbb{P}^3(F) \\
(x_{1} : x_{2} : x_{0}) & \mapsto (x_{1} : x_{2} : x_{1}^{2} : x_{0}).
\end{split}
$$
This has image
$$
\{ (x_{1} : x_{2} : x_{3} : x_{0}) \in \mathbb{P}^{3}(F) \mid x_{3} x_{0} - x_{1}^{2} = 0 \}.
$$
That is, we embed $\mathbb{P}^{2}(F)$ into the zero set of a polynomial.

Under this embedding, we can rewrite the quartic as
$$
x_{2}^{2} = (x_{0} - x_{3})(x_{0} - k^{2} x_{3}).
$$
which gives us the original quartic embedded in $V(F)$ —
$$
V(F) = \{ (x_{1} : x_{2} : x_{3} : x_{0}) \in \mathbb{P}^{3}(F) \mid x_{1}^{2} - x_{3} x_{0} = (x_{0} - x_{3})(x_{0} - k^{2} x_{3}) = 0 \}.
$$

Now, there are two points at infinity in $V(F)$ — if $x_{0} = 0$ we can have $(x_{1} : x_{2} : x_{3} : x_{0}) = (0 : \pm k : 1 : 0)$. We claim that now $V(F)$ is a [[Algebraic Geometry --- math-176/notes/Non-singular projective varieties#_definition _ non-singular projective variety|non-singular projective variety]], but also that this is in fact an elliptic curve! This resolves our genus issue.

Can we generalise this? Yes!

##### _theorem:_ quartics are elliptic curves

Suppose $F$ is a field with $\operatorname{char} F > 3$. Consider the quartic curve with a singular point at $(0 : 1 : 0)$, $E$, given by
$$
E : y^{2} = a_{4} x^4 + a_{3} x^3 + a_{2} x^{2} + a_{1} x + a_{0}
$$
and denote the quartic in $x$ by $f$.

Then given
$$
\begin{split}
A & = \frac{-a^{2} + 3 a_{1} a_{3} - 12 a_{0} a_{4}}{3} \\
B & = \frac{2 a_{2}^{3} - 9 a_{1} a_{2} a_{3} + 27 a_{0} a_{3}^{2} + 27 a_{1}^{2} a_{4} - 72 a_{0} a_{2} a_{4}}{27}.
\end{split}
$$

1) $f$ has distinct roots in $\overline{F}$ if and only if $\Delta(E) = -16(4 A^3 + 27 B^2) \neq 0$.
2) $E(F)$ is a non-singular projective variety if and only if $\Delta(E) = 0$.
3) There exists a substitution over $\overline{F}$ that places $y^{2} = f$ in short Weierstrass form — $Y^{2} = X^{3} + A X + B$.

###### _proof:_

For 1), just consider the product of the roots times $a_{4}^6$, and multiply out using Vieta's formulas relating the sums and products of roots to the coefficient, and get back $A$ and $B$.

Just look at the columns long enough to show that two of them are always linearly independent. Or, do all the strange linear algebra that Goins did in class.

Since $f$ has a factorisation over $\overline{F}$, use it — write
$$
\frac{y^{2}}{(x - e_{4})^4} = a_{4} \frac{(x - e_{1})(x- e_{2})(x - e_{3})(x - e_{4})}{(x - e_{4})^4}
$$
and thus, get the cubic
$$
\frac{y}{(x - e_{4})^4} = a_{4} \left( \frac{x - e_{1}}{x - e_{4}} \right)\left( \frac{x - e_{2}}{x - e_{4}} \right) \left( \frac{x - e_{3}}{x - e_{4}} \right).
$$

This becomes the elliptic curve we want if we substitute
$$
\begin{split}
X & = \frac{f'(e_{4})}{x - e_{4}} + \frac{f''(e_{4})}{6} \\
Y & = f'(e_{4}) \frac{y}{(x - e_{4})^{2}}
\end{split}
$$
Note that $f'(e_{4}) \neq 0$ since $f$ does not have repeated roots.

Note that by dividing by $e_{4}$, we send points where $x = e_{4}$ to infinity.

However, note that these substitutions only work over $\overline{F}$, but there are substitutions that work even over $F \neq \overline{F}$. these are written in Cassels' *Lectures on Elliptic Curves* and the lecture notes.

We can generalise this even further!

##### _theorem:_ quadric intersections are elliptic curves

Say $A, B$ are two $4$-by-$4$ symmetric matrices and form homogenous polynomials
$$
\begin{split}
f_{1}(x_{1} : x_{2} : x_{3} : x_{0}) = \frac{1}{2} A (x_{1}, x_{2}, x_{3}, x_{0}) \cdot (x_{1}, x_{2}, x_{3}, x_{0}) \\
f_{2}(x_{1} : x_{2} : x_{3} : x_{0}) = \frac{1}{2} B (x_{1}, x_{2}, x_{3}, x_{0}) \cdot (x_{1}, x_{2}, x_{3}, x_{0})
\end{split}
$$
Then
$$
V(F) = \{ P \in \mathbb{P}^3(F) \mid f_{1}(p) = f_{2}(p) = 0 \}
$$
is an elliptic curve, called a quadric intersection

However, this is a difficult result.