---
tags:
- math-176/25
- math-176/26
- math-176/27
- math-176/28
- math-176/29
- alg-geo
---

In algebraic geometry, we want to consider the collection of all prime ideals of a ring. We call it the spectrum!

##### _definition:_ $\operatorname{Spec} R$, spectrum

The spectrum of an integral domain, is the collection of all of its prime ideals
$$
\operatorname{Spec} R = \{ P \subset R \mid P \text{ is prime} \}.
$$

The prime ideals are respected by ring homomorphisms and thus induce an inverse map on the spectra. (This is a contravariant [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Functors and natural transformations|functor]]!)

##### _proposition:_ the pullback on spectra

Suppose $\varphi : R \to S$ is a non-trivial homomorphism between integral domains. Then the pre-image of a prime $P \subset S$ is a prime in $R$ — $\varphi^\text{pre}(P)$ is prime in $R$ and the pullback
$$
\begin{split}
\varphi^* & : \operatorname{Spec} S \to \operatorname{Spec} R \\
 & : P \mapsto \varphi^\text{pre}(P).
\end{split}
$$
is well defined.

###### _proof:_

Suppose $P \subset S$ is prime. First we show that $I = \varphi^\text{pre}(P)$ is an ideal. 

Note that $I$ is non-empty since $0 \in P$ which is mapped to by $0$. If $a, b \in I$ and $r \in R$, then $\varphi(a + b) = \varphi(a) + \varphi(b) \in P$ since $\varphi(a), \varphi(b) \in P$, and $\varphi(r a) = \varphi(r) \varphi(a) \in P$ since this is a multiple of $\varphi(a) \in P$. Thus, $I$ is an ideal.

Now suppose $a, b \in R$ and $ab \in I$. Then $\varphi(ab)  = \varphi(a) \varphi(b) \in P$, and thus one of $\varphi(a), \varphi(b) \in P$. But then the corresponding one of $a, b \in P$.

##### _definition:_ $\operatorname{mSpec} R$, the max spectrum

The max spectrum of $R$ is the collection of all maximal ideals $M \subset R$.

##### _example:_ the spectra of $\mathbb{Z}$

Since $\mathbb{Z}$ is a [[Abstract Algebra I --- math-171/notes/Factorisation in special rings#_definition _ principal ideal domain|principal ideal domain]] the prime ideals and maximal ideals are almost exactly identical — $\mathbb{Z} / n \mathbb{Z}$ is an field if and only if $n$ is prime and an integral domain if $n$ is prime. However, $\mathbb{Z} = \mathbb{Z} / 0 \mathbb{Z}$ is also an integral domain. Thus,
$$
\operatorname{Spec} \mathbb{Z} = \{ (0) \} \cup \{ (2), (3), (5), (7), \dots \} = \{ 0 \} \cup \operatorname{mSpec} \mathbb{Z}.
$$

So $1$ is not a prime, but $0$ is!

##### _example:_ the spectra of a field and its [[Algebraic Geometry --- math-176/notes/Polynomial rings#_definition _ polynomial, degree, $R[x]$|polynomial ring]]

Say $F$ is our field. Since $F$ is a field, it only has one proper ideal — $(0)$.  That is, $\operatorname{Spec} F = \operatorname{mSpec} F = \{ (0) \}$.

However, $F[x]$ has a lot of maximal ideals! $R/I$ is a field for any $I = (f)$ where $f$ is an irreducible polynomial.

Fix $a \in F$, and define $\varphi : R \to F$ by $f \mapsto f(a)$. What's the pullback? Well, there's only one ideal in $\operatorname{Spec} F$ so there's only one thing to check. What gets sent to zero? All the polynomials that have a root at $a$! That is, $\varphi^*((0)) = (x - a)$.

One reason that spectra are so useful is that we can use the max spectrum of a polynomial ring to replace [[Algebraic Geometry --- math-176/notes/Projective space#_definition _ affine space|affine space]]!

##### _proposition:_ maximal ideals on algebraically closed $F[x_{1}, \dots, x_{n}]$

If $F$ is an algebraically closed field, every maximal ideal $M \subset F[x_{1}, \dots, x_{n}]$ is generated by $n$ linear polynomials $x_{i} - a_{i}$. That is, there is a bijection between $\mathbb{A}^n(F)$ and $\operatorname{mSpec}(F[x_{1}, \dots, x_{n}])$.

###### _proof:_

Choose a maximal ideal $M$. Then $R/M$ is a field with $F \xhookrightarrow{} R / M$ so $R / M$ is an algebraic extension of $F$. Since $F$ is algebraically closed, we must have $F \cong R/M$. Consider $\varphi : R \to R / M \cong F$ with $\ker \varphi = M$ which exists by the [[Abstract Algebra I --- math-171/notes/Ideals and quotients#_proposition, definition _ quotient rings are rings|converse of the first isomorphism theorem]].

Suppose $\varphi(x_{k}) = a_{k}$. Then $\varphi$ is just evaluating polynomials in $R$ at $(a_{1}, \dots, a_{n})$. Then all $x_{k} - a_{k} \in M$. Consider the ideal $(x_{1} - a_{1}, \dots, x_{n} - a_{n})$. This is exactly the kernel of $\varphi$, so $M = (x_{1} - a_{1}, \dots, x_{n} - a_{n})$ since this is exactly all the polynomials with roots at any of the $a_{k}$.

Note that this is not true if $F$ is not algebraically closed —

##### _example:_

$\mathbb{R}[x] / (x^{2} + 1) \cong \mathbb{C}$ so $(x^{2} + 1)$ is maximal, but $(x^{2} + 1)$ cannot be generated by any single degree $1$ ideal. Essentially the problem is that we cannot factor $(x^{2} + 1)$ which is resolved in the algebraically complete $\mathbb{C}$ ($(x^{2} + 1) \subset (x - i)$ in $\mathbb{C}[x]$).

### $\operatorname{Spec} R$ as a variety

We can use [[Algebraic Geometry --- math-176/notes/Irreducible subsets#_proposition _ $V$ irreducible implies $I(V)$ prime|the correspondence between primes and irreducible varieties]] to think of prime ideals in the spectrum as points.

##### _proposition:_ primes as points

Suppose $F$ is algebraically closed and $(f_{1}, \dots, f_{n})$ is prime in $R = F[x_{1}, \dots, x_{n}]$. Then there is a bijection between points $(a_{1}, \dots, a_{n})$ in $X = Z(I)$ and maximal ideals $\overline{M} = (x_{1} - a_{1}, \dots, x_{n} - a_{n}) / I$ in $\operatorname{mSpec} R / I$.

###### _proposition:_

We claim that the bijection is given by $(a_{1}, \dots, a_{n}) \mapsto  \overline{M_{p}} = M_{p} / I = (x_{1} - a_{1}, \dots, x_{n} - a_{n}) / I$. 

Note that $M_{p}$ [[Algebraic Geometry --- math-176/notes/Spectra#_proposition _ maximal ideals on algebraically closed $F[x_{1}, dots, x_{n}]$|is maximal]] — in fact, all maximal ideals in $R$ are some $M_{p}$. Since the [[Abstract Algebra I --- math-171/notes/Ring isomorphism theorems#Fourth isomorphism theorem|fourth isomorphism theorem]] is inclusion preserving, we have that $\overline{M_{p}}$ is maximal exactly when $M_{p}$ is. Thus, all maximal ideals in $R / I$ are some $(x_{1} - a_{1}, \dots, x_{n} - a_{n}) / I$. That is, the map is surjective.

However, so far, we've only shown that this is a map $\mathbb{A}^n(F) \to \operatorname{mSpec} R / I$. We need to show that modding out by $R / I$ means that this map is only injective when restricted to $X$. Note that for $M_{p} / I$ to be sensible, we must have $I \subset M_{p}$. But then any $f \in I$ is also in $M$, giving us
$$
f = \sum_{i = 1}^n g_{i} (x - a_{i})
$$
and thus,
$$
f(a_{1}, \dots, a_{n}) = 0.
$$

Thus, given a variety $X$ over an algebraically closed field we have a very natural embedding
$$
X \xhookrightarrow{} \operatorname{Spec} R / \mathcal{O}(X)
$$
and further, we can think of
$$
V = \operatorname{Spec} S
$$
as an abstract variety for any ring $S$.