---
tags:
- math-145/12
- alg-top
---

Let $X$ be a [[Topics in Geometry and Topology --- math-145/notes/Simplicial complexes#_definition _ simplicial complex|simplicial complex]].

Our goal is to define the $n$th homology of $X$. Just as with [[Topics in Geometry and Topology --- math-145/notes/Homology in the plane|homology in the plane]] we will have to define chains, then boundaries, and then take quotients.

### Chains, cycles, and boundaries

##### _definition:_ chains

The [[Linear algebra done right --- ladr/notes/Vector spaces#_definition _ vector space|vector space]] of $k$-chains in $X$ with coefficients in a [[Abstract Algebra I --- math-171/notes/Fields#_definition _ fields|field]] $\mathbb{F}$ is $\mathrm{C}_{k}(X, \mathbb{F})$, the vector space generated by $[a_{0}, a_{1}, \dots, a_{k}]$ such that $\{ a_{0}, a_{1}, \dots, a_{k} \}$, subject to the relations that if $a_{i} = a_{j}$ with $i \neq j$, we have $[a_{0}, a_{1}, \dots, a_{k}] = 0$, and that if $\sigma$ is a transposition, $[a_{0}, a_{1}, \dots, a_{k}] = - [a_{\sigma(0)}, a_{\sigma(1)}, \dots, a_{\sigma(k)}]$.

Note that we need to specify the transposition condition since we can't go from self-killing.

Of course, to formalise this notion of relations we can just quotient out the free vector space on all $[a_{0}, a_{1}, \dots, a_{k}]$, and quotient by the subspace consisting of all $[a_{0}, a_{1}, \dots, a_{k}]$ that have $a_{i} = a_{j}$ for some $i \neq j$.

This relation actually goes a bit further — it tells us that odd permutations change the sign of a simplicial complex while even permutations fix it.

##### _proposition:_ the action of the symmetric group

For a [[Abstract Algebra I --- math-171/notes/Group combinatorics and symmetric groups#_definition _ the symmetric group on $ Omega$|permutation]] $\sigma$, $[a_{0}, a_{1}, \dots, a_{k}] = (-1)^{\operatorname{sgn} \sigma} [a_{\sigma(0)}, a_{\sigma(1)}, \dots, a_{\sigma(k)}]$.

###### _proof:_
follows from the fact that all permutations can be decomposed into transpositions.

All of this goes to say that given an ordering on the vertices of $X$, there is a basis of $\mathrm{C}_{k}(X, \mathbb{F})$ by $[a_{0}, a_{1}, \dots, a_{k}]$ with $a_{0} \le a_{1} \leq, \dots \leq a_{k}$. Note that this means that $\dim \mathrm{C}_{k} = \# X^{(k)}$ — the $k$-chains are generated by the $k$-[[Topics in Geometry and Topology --- math-145/notes/Simplicial complexes#_definition _ $k$-skeleton|skeleton]] of $X$.

The $k$-boundaries are the image of the boundary map on $(k + 1)$-chains.

##### _definition:_ boundary map

The $k$-boundary map $\partial_{k} : \mathrm{C}_{k + 1}(X, \mathbb{F}) \to \mathrm{C}_{k}(X, \mathbb{F})$ is given by
$$
\partial_{k}[a_{0}, a_{1}, \dots, a_{k + 1}] = \sum_{i = 0}^k (-1)^i [\dots, \widehat{a_{i}}, \dots]
$$
where the hatted $a_{i}$ indicates that $a_{i}$ is removed from the $(k + 1)$-chain to give a $k$-chain.

We do need to check that $\partial_{k}$ respects the quotient structure on $\mathrm{C}_{k + 1}$ since it is defined on the free vector space of all $[a_{0}, a_{1}, \dots, a_{k + 1}]$ of which $\mathrm{C}_{k + 1}$ is a quotient. This is horrible and heartbreaking because you can't use the usual trick for the same reasons that we couldn't use the usual trick to convert.

This really is a reasonable definition for a boundary since the boundary of a boundary is zero.

##### _proposition:_ $\partial^{2} = 0$

For any $k$, the composition $\partial_{k - 1} \circ \partial_{k} : \mathrm{C}_{k + 1} \to \mathrm{C}_{k - 1}$ is really the zero map.

###### _proof:_

The boundary is the sum of terms
$$
(-1)^{i + j - 1}[\dots, \widehat{a_{i}}, \dots, \widehat{a_{j}}, \dots] + (-1)^{i + j} [\dots, \widehat{a_{i}}, \dots, \widehat{a_{j}}, \dots]
$$
(signs corresponding to removing $i$ or $j$ first, respectively).

But then this is a sum of zeroes.

Thus, we get the simplicial chain complex as a chain complex (a weakening of [[Abstract Algebra I --- math-171/notes/Exact sequences#_definition _ exact sequence|exact sequences]] where the image of a map is only required to be contained in the kernel of the next).

##### _definition:_ simplicial chain complex

The simplicial chain complex is the chain complex below.
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsfonts}
\begin{document}
	\begin{tikzcd}
		0 & \mathrm{C}_{0}(X, \mathbb{F}) \ar[l] & \mathrm{C}_{1}(X, \mathbb{F}) \ar[l, "\partial_{0}"] & \mathrm{C}_{2}(X, \mathbb{F}) \ar[l, "\partial_{1}"] & \dots \ar[l, "\partial_{2}"]
	\end{tikzcd}
\end{document}
```

Now we can define the boundaries, cycle, and homology.

##### _definition:_ boundaries

The vector space of $k$-boundaries is $\mathrm{B}_{k}(X, \mathbb{F}) = \operatorname{img} \partial_{k}$.

##### _definition:_ cycles

The vector space of $k$-cycles is $\mathrm{Z}_{k}(X, \mathbb{F}) = \ker \partial_{k - 1}$.

Notice that by $\partial^{2} = 0$, we have $\mathrm{B}_{k} \subseteq \mathrm{Z}_{k}$. Thus, we can define the homology as the corresponding quotient.

##### _definition:_ simplicial homology, Betti number

The $k$th simplicial homology of $X$ is $\mathrm{H}_{k}(X, \mathbb{F}) = \mathrm{Z_{k}}(X, \mathbb{F}) / \mathrm{B}_{k}(X, \mathbb{F})$.

Its dimension is the $k$th Betti number $\mathrm{b}_{k}(X, \mathbb{F})$.

### Is simplicial homology reasonable?

We want to prove that our homology really is counting holes like we want it to. The first sanity check is Betti zero for which [[Topics in Geometry and Topology --- math-145/notes/Whitehead equivalence#_proposition _ number of connected components is Whitehead invariant|we already have a desired definition]].

##### _proposition:_ zeroth Betti number counts connected components

The zeroth Betti number $\mathrm{b}_{0}(X, \mathbb{F})$ of $\mathbb{F}$ counts the number of connected components of $X$.

###### _proof:_

The number of connected components of $X$ is [[Topics in Geometry and Topology --- math-145/notes/Whitehead equivalence#_proposition _ number of connected components is Whitehead invariant|defined]] to be the number of connected components of its $1$-[[Topics in Geometry and Topology --- math-145/notes/Simplicial complexes#_definition _ $k$-skeleton|skeleton]]. From here the proof is almost exactly the same as for [[Topics in Geometry and Topology --- math-145/notes/Homology in the plane#_theorem _ zeroth Betti number counts polygonally path-connected components|homology in the plane]].

Given $k$ connected components of $X$, we claim that $[a_{1}], \dots, [a_{k}]$ where $a_{i}$ is in the $i$th component is a basis of $\mathrm{H}_{0}$. 

To show linear independence, we define the $i$th mass function
$$
m_{i}[a] = \begin{cases}
1 & [a] \text{ is connected to } [a_{i}] \\
0.
\end{cases}
$$

Notice that each $m_{i}$ gives $m_{i} \partial_{0} = 0$ since $m_{i} \partial_{0} [a, b] = 0$ for every $a, b$ since $a, b$ must be in the same connected component for $[a, b]$ to exist. If
$$
\lambda_{1} [a_{1}] + \dots + \lambda_{k} [a_{k}] + \mathrm{B}_{0} = 0
$$
then applying $m_{i}$ we see that $\lambda_{i} = 0$.

To show that they span $\mathrm{H}_{0}$ we need to show that, for any $[a] + \mathrm{B}_{0} \in \mathrm{H}_{0}$, we have
$$
[a] = \lambda_{1} [a_{1}] + \dots + \lambda_{k} [a_{k}] + \mathrm{B}_{0}.
$$
If $[a]$ is in connected component $j$, then there is a path $\gamma$ from $[a_{j}]$ to $[a]$. We have $[a] = [a_{j}] + \partial_{0} \gamma$.

Another reasonable guess is that the homology of a cone is the same as the homology of a point. That is,

##### _theorem:_ cones have trivial homology

If $C$ is a [[Topics in Geometry and Topology --- math-145/notes/Simplicial complexes#_example _ cones|cone]], then $\mathrm{b}_{0}(C) = 0$ and $\mathrm{b}_{k}(C) = 0$ for all $k > 0$.

###### _proof:_

Since every vertex has an edge to $*$, $\mathrm{b}_{0} = 1$.

To show that the higher homologies are trivial requires more effort. To this end, we define linear maps $K_{k} : \mathrm{C}_{k} \to \mathrm{C}_{k + 1}$ by $K_{k}[a_{0}, a_{1}, \dots, a_{k}] = [*, a_{0}, a_{1}, \dots, a_{k}]$. We need to verify that this respects the quotient structure on $\mathrm{C}_{k}$ since again, it is defined on the generators without obviously respecting the relations, but we claim that it just does. We hope that every $k$-cycle $\gamma$ is actually the boundary of $K_{k} \gamma$ for 

(Suppressing indices $k$) we claim the following diagram is a "morphism of homotopy complexes"

```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsfonts}
\begin{document}
	\begin{tikzcd}
		\dots & \mathrm{C}_{k - 1}(X, \mathbb{F}) \ar[l, "\partial"] \ar[rd, "K"] & \mathrm{C}_{k}(X, \mathbb{F}) \ar[l, "\partial"] \ar[rd, "K"] & \mathrm{C}_{k + 1}(X, \mathbb{F}) \ar[l, "\partial"] & \dots \ar[l, "\partial"] \\
		\dots & \mathrm{C}_{k - 1}(X, \mathbb{F}) \ar[l, "\partial"] & \mathrm{C}_{k}(X, \mathbb{F}) \ar[l, "\partial"] & \mathrm{C}_{k + 1}(X, \mathbb{F}) \ar[l, "\partial"] & \dots \ar[l, "\partial"]
	\end{tikzcd}
\end{document}
```

That is, all of the horizontal and vertical maps commute and for the diagonal map we have $\partial K + K \partial = \operatorname{id}_{\mathrm{C}_{k}}$. To prove this is essentially just a computation.

From this, it follows that for any $\gamma \in \mathrm{Z}_{k}$ we have $\gamma = \partial K \gamma + K \partial \gamma = \partial (K \gamma)$.