---
tags:
- alg
- math-171
lecture: math-171-4
---

### Warm up

What's the group table for the cyclic group of order $4$? For the group $\{ 1, -1, i, -i \} \subset \mathbb{C}$ under multiplication?

| - | $1$ | $x$ | $x^2$ | $x^3$ |
| ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| $1$ | 1 | $x$ | $x^2$ | $x^3$ |
| $x$ | $x$ | $x^2$ | $x^3$ | $1$ |
| $x^2$ | $x^2$ | $x^3$ | $1$ | $x$ |
| $x^3$ | $x^3$ | $1$ | $x$ | $x^2$ |
and

| - | $1$ | $-1$ | $i$ | $-i$ |
| ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| $1$ | 1 | $-1$ | $i$ | $-i$ |
| $-1$ | $-1$ | $1$ | $-i$ | $1$ |
| $i$ | $i$ | $-i$ | $-1$ | $1$ |
| $-i$ | $-i$ | $1$ | $1$ | $-1$ |

Note how they're basically the same thing! They're both generated by one element, and there are two options — $x$ or $x^3$ for the cyclic group, or $i$ or $-i$ for the complex number group. In fact, if you just labeled $x = i$ in the first group table, you'd get a rearranged group table for the second group! 

Later on we will formally define this as an [[Isomorphisms|isomorphism]]. We will use this notion in this class very liberally, and not just for groups.

### Rings

Let's play "Are These Groups?"

##### _examples:_ Are These Groups?

1) $\mathbb{Z}$ under addition? Yes!
2) $\mathbb{Z}$ under multiplication? No
3) $\mathbb{R}$ under addition? Yes!
4) $\mathbb{R}$ under multiplication? No
5) $\mathbb{R} \setminus \{ 0 \}$ under multiplication? Yes!
6) $\mathcal{M}_{n}(\mathbb{R})$ under addition? Yes!
7) $\mathcal{M}_{n}(\mathbb{R}) \setminus \{ \mathbf{0} \}$ under multiplication? No

Notice how things that are groups under "addition" often fail to be groups under multiplication by some trivial failure to have a multiplicative inverse for the additive identity. This leads to our definition of a ring 

##### _definition:_ rings

A ring $R$ is a set with two binary operations (typically $+$ and $\times$) such that
- $(R, +)$ is an abelian group
- $\times$ is associative
- $\times$ distributes over $+$. That is, $(a + b) \times c = (a \times c) + (b \times c)$ and $a \times(b + c) = (a \times b) + (b \times c)$

We are usually careful to make use parentheses for abstract rings (so that we don't have to deal with order of operations bullshit) but for familiar rings, we will use the conventions.

##### _definition:_ commutative ring

A ring $R$ is commutative if its multiplication $\times$ is [[Motivating groups#_definition _ commutativity|commutative]].

##### _definition:_ ring with identity

A ring $R$ is said to have identity if it contains some $1 \in R$ such that $1 \times a = a \times 1 = a$ for all $a \in R$.

##### _examples:_ rings

1) $\mathcal{M}_{n}(\mathbb{R})$
2) $\mathbb{Z}$
3) $2\mathbb{Z}$ — the even integers
4) $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$ — the integers modulo $n$.

##### _examples and non-examples:_ commutative rings with identity

1) $\mathcal{M}_{n}(\mathbb{R})$ is a non-commutative ring with unity $I$
2) $\mathbb{C}$ is a commutative ring with identity $1$
3) $2 \mathbb{Z}$ is a commutative ring without identity! Pay attention to this example!

### A digression on fields

There's a special subtype of commutative rings with identity — fields.

##### _definition:_ fields

A ring with multiplicative identity $1 \neq 0$ where every nonzero element has a multiplicative inverse, and the multiplication is commutative is called a field.

##### _example:_ fields

1) $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$ is a field if and only if $n$ is prime
2) $\mathbb{Q}$, the rational numbers
3) $\mathbb{F}_{2}$ is the unique finite field of order $2$. It is just $\{ 0, 1 \}$.

##### _facts:_ about fields!

We may not prove these in this class

1) There is exactly one field (upto isomorphism) of order $p^n$ where $p$ is any prime and $n$ is any natural number.

### Things about rings

Here are some basic facts about any ring $R$, and any elements $a, b \in R$. $0$ is the additive identity, and if $R$ has an identity, we denote it by $1$.

##### _proposition:_ multiplying by zero gives zero

$$
0a = a0 = 0
$$

##### _proof sketch:_

$$
\begin{split}
& 0a = (0 + 0)a \\
\implies & 0a - 0a = 0a + 0a - 0a \\
\implies & 0 = 0a
\end{split}
$$
and similarly for right multiplication.

##### _proposition:_ multiplying by additive inverses gives additive inverses

$$
(-a)b = a(-b) = - ab
$$

##### _proof sketch:_

$$
\begin{split}
& (a - a)b = 0 \\
\implies & ab + (-a)b = 0 \\
\implies & (a)b = -ab
\end{split}
$$
and similarly for right multiplication.

##### _corollary:_ multiplying two additive inverses is the same as multiplying two numbers

$$
(-a)(-b) = ab
$$

##### _proof sketch:_

$$
\begin{split}
(-a)(-b) & = - a(-b) \\
& = - (-ab) \\
& = ab
\end{split}
$$

##### _proposition:_ the identity is unique

If $R$ has identity $1$, it is unique.

##### _proof sketch:_

Suppose $1'$ is another multiplicative identity. Then
$$
\begin{split}
1 & = 1 \times 1' \\
& = 1'
\end{split}
$$

##### _corollary:_ the identity gives inverses

 $(-1)a = -a$ for $a \in R$.
 
##### _proof:_

Note that
$$
\begin{split}
(-1) a & = -(1a) \\
& = - a
\end{split}
$$
giving us that $(-1)a$ is the unique additive inverse of $a$ — $-a$.