---
tags:
- alg
- math-171
lecture:
- math-171-17
---

[[Rings revisited|Last class]] we gave a bunch of definitions for subsets of rings with structure — [[Rings revisited#_definition _ subring|subrings]] and [[Rings revisited#_definition _ (left and right) ideals|ideals]]. Today we do a bunch of stuff that has to do with it. First,

### Definitions and examples

##### _definition:_ two-sided ideal

A two-sided ideal is both a left and right ideal.

##### _definition:_ ideal

If $R$ is a commutative ring, the left ideals are exactly the right ideals, and thus, they are all just called ideals.

Sometimes even when $R$ is not commutative, we refer to two-sided ideals as just ideals.

In essence an ideal is an "$R$-vector space".

##### _examples:_ ideals

1) $3 \mathbb{Z}$ (the multiples of $3$) is an ideal in $\mathbb{Z}$.
2) Any ideal of $\mathbb{Q}$ is just $\mathbb{Q}$ (or the trivial ring). This is true for any division ring (?). Definitely for any field.
3) We can think of "the ideal generated by". This is just the smallest ideal containing the things it is generated by (we will make this precise). The right ideal generated by $\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 1 \\ 0 & 0\end{bmatrix}$ in $\mathcal{M}_{2}(\mathbb{R})$ is $\left \{ \begin{bmatrix} x & y \\ 0 & 0 \end{bmatrix} \mid x, y \in \mathbb{R} \right  \}$. The left ideal is $\left \{ \begin{bmatrix} x & x \\ y & y \end{bmatrix} \mid x, y \in \mathbb{R} \right \}$.

##### _non-example:_ ideal

The polynomials with nonzero constant coefficient in $\mathbb{R}[x]$ do not form an ideal — they are not even a subring.

### Generating ideals

Here we make the thing that we said we would make precise precise.

##### _definition:_ $(A)$, $RA$, $AR$

Let $A$ be a subset of a ring $R$.

$(A)$ is the smallest ideal of $R$ that contains $A$.

The left ideal generated by $A$ is
$$
RA = \left\{  \sum_{i = 1}^n r_{i} a_{i} \mid r_{i} \in R, a_{i} \in A, n \in \mathbb{N}  \right\}
$$

The right ideal generated by $A$ is
$$
AR = \left\{  \sum_{i = 1}^n a_{i} r_{i} \mid r_{i} \in R, a_{i} \in A, n \in \mathbb{N}  \right\}
$$

Note that
$$
(A) = \bigcap_{\text{ideals } I, A \subset I} I.
$$

##### _abuse of notation:_ $(a_{1}, \dots, a_{n})$

Sometimes, for $A = \{ a_{1}, \dots, a_{n} \}$ we write $(A) = (a_{1}, \dots, a_{n})$.

##### _definition:_ principal ideal

An ideal $I \subset R$ is principal if $I = (a)$.

##### _example:_ every ideal in $\mathbb{Z}$ is principal

Every ideal in $\mathbb{Z}$ is of the form $n\mathbb{Z}$.

##### _proposition:_ when rings are fields

For any ideal $I \subset R$
1) $I = R$ if and only if $I$ contains a [[Rings revisited#_definition _ unit|unit]].
2) If $R$ is commutative, then $R$ is a field if and only if the only ideals of $R$ are the trivial ring and $R$.

### Quotient rings

Since ideals include everything you could multiply an element by, we only really need to quotient out by the additive group to get a quotient ring. Basically, an ideal is the equivalent of a [[Normal subgroups|normal subgroup]] for a ring.

##### _proposition, definition:_ quotient rings are rings

For any ring $R$ with an ideal $I \subset R$. The (additive) quotient group $(R, +)/I$ is a ring under the binary operations
$$
\begin{split}
(r + I) + (s + I) & = (r + s) + I \\
(r + I)(s + I) & = (rs) + I.
\end{split}
$$

This ring is called the quotient ring $R/I$.

###### _proof:_

Since $(R, +)$ is abelian, and $(I, +)$ is clearly a subgroup, the addition is clearly well-defined and forms an abelian group as necessary for a ring. We need to show that the multiplication is well-defined and behaves as desired. We will use things we know about [[Normal subgroups#Quotient groups|quotient groups]] to prove the multiplication part.

Suppose $r + I = r' + I$ and $s + I = s' + I$. Then $r = r' + i$ and $s = s' + j$ for some $i, j \in R$. Then
$$
\begin{split}
	(r + I)(s + I) & = ((r' + i) + I) ((s' + j) + I) \\
 & = (r's' + i s ' + r' j + ij) + I \\
 & = (r' s') + I. \\
\end{split}
$$
where the last step follows because $is' \in I$ by left absorption, $r'j \in I$ by right absorption and $ij \in I$ because it's a subring.

Notice then, that just like with normal subgroups of groups, every ideal $I \subset R$ is the kernel of the natural projection
$$
\begin{split}
\pi \colon & R \to R/I \\
& r \mapsto r + I.
\end{split}
$$