---
tags:
- math-171
- alg
lecture: math-171-19
---

### Euclidean domains

##### _example:_ the integers

In the integers, we can find the $\gcd$ of any two numbers by [[Euclid's algorithm and primes#Euclid's algorithm|Euclid's algorithm]]. This works because we have the [[Dividing integers - basic number theory#_theorem _ the division algorithm|the division algorithm]], which in turn, needs a notion of an order to work. A norm gives us this, and in turn, we will see, a form of Euclidean algorithm as well.

##### _definition:_ norm

If $R$ is an [[Rings revisited#_definition _ integral domain|integral domain]], a function $N : R \to \mathbb{Z}_{\ge 0}$ such that $N(0) = 0$ is a norm.

##### _definition:_ Euclidean domain

An integral domain $R$ is a Euclidean domain if there is a norm $N$ on $R$ such that for all $a, b \in R$ ($b \neq 0$) there exist $q, r \in R$ with $a = qb + r$ such that $r = 0$ or $N(r) < N(b)$.

##### _examples:_ Euclidean domains

1) Every field is a Euclidean domain where any positive definite norm works — $a = qb + 0$ where $q = b a^{-1}$. Note that we need positive definiteness, otherwise we could have $N(b) = 0$, and thus $N(0) \not < N(b)$.
2) $\mathbb{Z}$ is a Euclidean domain (obviously)
3) If $\mathbb{F}$ is a field, $\mathbb{F}[x]$ is a Euclidean domain with the norm $N(p) = \deg p$.

##### _proposition:_ Euclidean domains are principal ideal domains

If $I$ is a nonzero ideal in a Euclidean domain, then $I = (d)$ where $d$ is any nonzero element of $I$ with minimum norm.

###### _proof:_

If $I = 0$, then $I = (0)$.

If $I$ is nonzero, then let $d \in I$ be the nonzero element with least norm. Then, if $a \in I$, write $a = qd + r$ with $N(r) < N(d)$. Thus, $r \in I$ and $N(r) < N(d)$ which by the minimality of the norm of $d$ in $I$, means $r = 0$.

##### _example:_ $R[x]$ is not always Euclidean

We can see that $(2, x)$ is not principal in $\mathbb{Z}[x]$, so $\mathbb{Z}[x]$ is not a Euclidean domain

This leads us obviously to the notion of division and greatest common divisors.

##### _definition:_ divides, greatest common divisor

Suppose $R$ is commutative, and $a, b \in R$ with $a$ nonzero, we say $a \mid b$ or $a$ divides $b$ there exists some $x \in R$ such that $b = ax$.

The greatest common divisor of $a$ and $b$ is some $d \neq 0$ such that $d \mid a$ and $d \mid b$, and if there exists any $d'$ such that $d' \mid a$ and $d' \mid b$, then $d' \mid d$.

Note that $d \mid a$ is equivalent to $a \in (d)$ is equivalent to $(a) \subset (d)$. Thus, equivalently, we can define

$d$ is the greatest common divisor of $a$ and $b$ if $(a, b) \subset (d)$ and if $(a, b) \subset (d')$, then $(d) \subset (d')$.

##### _definition:_ prime

A nonzero $p \in R$ is prime if $(p)$ is a prime ideal.

Equivalently, $p$ is prime if it is not a unit, and $p \mid ab$ implies $p \mid a$ or $p \mid b$.

##### _proposition:_ the ideal equality implies $\gcd$

Suppose $R$ is commutative with $a, b$ nonzero. If $(a, b) = (d)$ then $d$ is a $\gcd$ of $a$ and $b$.

###### _proof:_

We already have that $(a, b) \subset d$. If $(a, b) \subset (d')$, then $(d) \subset (d')$.

##### _example:_ $\gcd$ does not imply

In $\mathbb{Z}[x]$, $1$ is the $\gcd$ of $2$ and $x$, but $(2, x) \neq (1) = \mathbb{Z}[x]$.

##### _proposition:_ in an integral domain, $\gcd$s differ only by units

If $R$ is an integral domain, then for any $d, d' \in R$, $(d) = (d')$ if and only if $d' = ud$ for some unit $u \in R$. 

Specifically, if $d$ and $d'$ are $\gcd$s of the same $a, b \in R$, then $d' = ud$.

###### _proof:_

See [[hw 13.pdf#page=7|Homework 13]] for the proof of the first part.

If $d$ and $d'$ are $\gcd$s of the same $a, b \in R$, then they divide each other, and thus, the ideals generated by them are subsets of each other. Then, by double containment, $(d) = (d')$.

To get further, again our motivating example is the integers.

##### _example:_ unique factorisation in $\mathbb{Z}$

We know that we have [[Euclid's algorithm and primes#_theorem _ unique factorisation|unique factorisation]] in $\mathbb{Z}$. It would be nice to have it in other rings.

We want to get to this. The first step is principal ideal domains.

### Principal ideal domains

##### _definition:_ principal ideal domain

A principal ideal domain is an integral domain in which every ideal is [[Ideals and quotients#_definition _ principal ideal|principal]].

##### _example:_ $\mathbb{Z}$, obviously

##### _proposition:_ every prime ideal is maximal (in PID)

Every nonzero prime ideal in a principal ideal domain $R$ is a maximal ideal.

###### _proof:_

Suppose we have some prime ideal $(p)$, contained in some arbitrary ideal $(m)$. Then we must have $m \mid p$. Thus $m d = p$. Since $p$ is prime, $p \mid m$ or $p \mid d$.

If $p \mid m$, then since they divide each other, $(p) = (m)$.

If $p \mid d$, then we have $pd' = d$. Thus $mpd' = p$ giving us $md' = 1$ and thus, $(m)$ is a unit. Thus $(m) = R$.

Thus, the only 

A nice little proposition this gives us is that

##### _proposition:_ the polynomials are a PID only if the ring is a field

For a ring $R$, if $R[x]$ is a principal ideal domain, $R$ is a field.

###### _proof:_

Since $R[x]$ is a principal ideal domain, it is an integral domain, and thus, $R$, as a subring is an integral domain. Then since $R[x]/(x) \cong R$, $R[x] / (x)$ is an integral domain, and thus, $(x)$ [[Special ideals#_proposition _ prime ideals have integral domains as quotients|is prime]], and thus, by the previous result is maximal, and finally, $R \cong R[x] / (x)$ is a field.