---
tags:
- uc-2026/morse/2
- uc-2026/morse/3
- carmen-rovi
- diff-geo
- alg-top
---

Let $X$ be a smooth manifold.

The idea of Morse theory is to generalise the height functions to functions that subdivide the manifold into nice level sets. Because we have observed the behaviour change at critical points, the right idea is to consider functions with isolated (discrete) critical points.

##### _definition:_ non-degenerate, Morse type critical points, maxima, minima, Morse function

A [[UChicago --- uc-2026/notes/Manifolds background#_definition _ critical point|critical point]] of a smooth function $f : X \to \mathbb{R}$ is **non-degenerate** or of **Morse type** if its Hessian has non-zero determinant.

$f : X \to \mathbb{R}$ is a **Morse function** if all its critical points are Morse type.

---

For these nice critical points, we can define an index. This is basically the [[Quadratic forms and K-theory --- pcmi-2021/notes/Diagonalisation of quadratic forms#_corollary _ diagonalising quadratic forms over $ overline{ mathbb{F}}$ and $ mathbb{R}$|signature]] of the quadratic form defined by the symmetric matrix that is the Hessian of $f$.

##### _definition, proposition:_ index of a Morse critical point on $\mathbb{R}^n$

Given $f : \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}$ with a Morse critical point at $0$ there is a unique integer $s$ and a change of coordinates $\varphi : \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}^n$ such that $f \circ \varphi = - \sum_{i = 1}^s x_{i}^{2} + \sum_{i = s + 1}^n x_{i}^{2}$. 

Equivalently, $s$ is the number of negative eigenvalues of the Hessian.

This unique integer $s$ is the **index** of the critical point of $f$ at $0$.

---

Each time we cross a critical point, we have interesting behaviour near the 

##### _lemma:_ classifying Morse behaviour at critical points by index

Suppose $X$ is a smooth compact surface and $f : X \to \mathbb{R}$ is a smooth function. Let $f(p) = z$.

Suppose $p$ is an index $0$ critical point of $f$. Then, for small enough $\varepsilon > 0$, $f^\text{pre}(-\infty, z + \varepsilon)$ has one more connected component than $f^\text{pre}(-\infty, z - \varepsilon)$. That is,
$$
\# \pi_{0}(f^\text{pre}(-\infty, z + \varepsilon)) = 1 + \# \pi_{0}(f^\text{pre}(-\infty, z - \varepsilon)).
$$

Suppose $p$ is an index $1$ critical point of $f$. Then, for small enough $\varepsilon > 0$ either 
- there is a $1$-cycle in $f^\text{pre}(z - \varepsilon)$ that is not homologous to any cycle in $f^\text{pre}(-\infty, z - \varepsilon)$, or
- $\# \pi_{0}(f^\text{pre}(-\infty, z + \varepsilon)) = \# \pi_{0}(f^\text{pre}(-\infty, z - \varepsilon)) - 1$.

Suppose $p$ is an index $2$ critical point of $f$. Then, for small enough $\varepsilon > 0$ either
- there is a null-homologous $1$-cycle in $f^\text{pre}(-\infty, z - \varepsilon)$ that is trivial in $f^\text{pre}(-\infty, z + \varepsilon)$, or
- there are no null-homologous $1$-cycles in $f^\text{pre}(-\infty, z - \varepsilon)$ and it has one more *closed* (boundaryless) connected component than $f^\text{pre}(-\infty, z + \varepsilon)$.

---

### The Morse complex

The idea is to consider a vector field with boundary maps between critical points given by flow lines between the vector points.

##### _definition, proposition:_ the Morse complex, Morse homology

Let $f : X \to \mathbb{R}$ be a smooth Morse function and let $\nabla f$ be the gradient vector field associated to it. Then the **Morse complex** of $f$ is the [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Complexes and exactness#_definition _ complexes, exactness, short exact sequence|complex]] $C_{\bullet}(f)$ as follows. 

$C_{i}$ is the free abelian group generated by the index $i$ critical points of $f$ with boundary maps $\partial : C_{i + 1} \to C_{i}$ given by 
$$
p_{i + 1} \mapsto \sum_{\text{generators }p_{k} \in C_{i}(V)} (-1)^r \# \{ \nabla f-\text{flow lines } p_{i + 1} \to p_{i} \}  p_{i}
$$
where $r$ is some sign associated to the flow lines.

The **Morse homology** of $X$ is homology of the torus.

---

Of course, it remains to show that this actually does form a complex so that we can take homology, but once we 

##### _example:_ height function Morse homology of a torus and a sphere

For the height function on a torus, every flow line is cancelled out by another one on the other side of the torus. But then all the boundary maps are trivial, and so the homology groups are exactly the chain groups. That is,
$$
H_{n}(\mathbb{T}^{2}, \mathbb{Z}) = \begin{cases}
\mathbb{Z} & n = 2 \\
\mathbb{Z}^{\oplus 2} & n = 1 \\
\mathbb{Z} & n = 0.
\end{cases}
$$

The same is true for the sphere $S^{2}$, except there are no index $1$ saddle points, so
$$
H_{n}(S^{2}, \mathbb{Z}) = \begin{cases}
\mathbb{Z} & n = 2 \\
0 & n = 1 \\
\mathbb{Z} & n = 0.
\end{cases}
$$

---

##### _example:_ height function Morse homology of the tilted bean

This is the first non-trivial case! We have $C_{2} = \mathbb{Z}^{\oplus 2}$ generated by two maxima $M_{1}, M_{2}$, $C_{1} = \mathbb{Z}$, generated by one saddle $s$, and $C_{0} = \mathbb{Z}$, generated by one minimum. $\partial : C_{2} \to C_{1}$ is given by $M_{1} \mapsto s$ and $M_{2} \mapsto -s$. $\partial : C_{1} \to C_{0}$ is given by $s \mapsto 0$. Thus, $H_{2}(X, \mathbb{Z}) = \mathbb{Z}[M_{1} + M_{2}] / 0 \cong \mathbb{Z}$, the first homology is trivial $H_{1}(X, \mathbb{Z}) = \mathbb{Z}[s] / \mathbb{Z}[s] \cong 0$ and $H_{0}(X, \mathbb{Z}) = \mathbb{Z}[m] / 0 \cong \mathbb{Z}$

---