---
tags:
- uc-2026/alg-top/2
- alg-top
- cat-th
- peter-may
- alicia-lima
---

### Ordered simplicial complexes

[[Simplicial homology and random walks --- math-145/notes/Simplicial homology#_proposition _ the action of the symmetric group|Recall]] that in order to define (the boundary maps for) simplicial homology, we had to put an order on the vertices of each simplex. This motivates the definition of ordered simplicial complexes.

##### _definition:_ ordered simplicial complexes, morphism of ordered simplicial complexes

An **ordered simplicial complex** is a [[Simplicial homology and random walks --- math-145/notes/Simplicial complexes#_definition _ simplicial complex, simplex|simplicial complex]] with a partial order on the set of vertices that restricts to a total order on each simplex.

A **morphism of ordered simplicial complexes** is then a morphism of simplicial complexes such that function on vertex sets is a morphism of posets.

---

These are good enough for homology, but only of spaces homeomorphic to simplicial complexes. Further, it's not clear that this homology theory only depends on the [[Algebraic topology --- concise/notes/Higher homotopy groups#Weak homotopy equivalence|(weak)]] [[Algebraic topology --- concise/notes/Homotopy#_definition _ homotopy equivalence|homotopy type]] of a topological space.

### Simplicial and cosimplicial objects

The first approximation to a good theory would be to choose a category with each object representing the $n$-simplex and strictly order preserving morphisms $[m] \to [n]$ representing inclusions of $m$-faces of $n$-simplexes for $m < n$. Then, contravariant $\mathsf{Set}$ valued functors are **delta sets** (or **semi-simplicial complexes**) with face maps sending an $n$-delta to its $(n - 1)$-delta faces. This notion us to take "quotients" of simplices with two points identified. Also, since they are functors valued in $\mathsf{Set}$, the category is bicomplete (contains all limits and colimits)!

However, choosing morphisms to be natural transformations doesn't allow us to consider collapsing of simplices as a morphism. For example, we want the morphism $[0, 1, 2] \to [0, 1]$ by $0 \mapsto 0$ and $1, 2 \mapsto 1$ to be a morphism of simplicial complexes, but this map doesn't correspond to any morphism of $\Delta$-simplices since we require the $2$-simplex $[0, 1, 2]$ to go to a non-existent $2$-simplex of $[0, 1]$. We solve this by adding a "degenerate" $2$-simplex $[0, 1, 1]$. Attaching all possible degenerate simplices gives us the simplicial sets. "Attaching" degenerate simplices just corresponds to allowing all poset functions rather than just totally ordered functions.

##### _definition:_ simplex category, $n$-simplices

The **simplex category** $\Delta$ is the category of finite subposets $\Delta^n = [0, n] = \{ 0, \dots, n \}$ of $\mathbb{N}_{0}$ with morphisms given by partially ordered functions.

---

The morphisms happen to be generated by face maps and degeneracy maps. On the codomain these correspond to regular codimension $1$ faces, and expressions of $1$-higher dimensional simplices as the whole simplex.

##### definition:_ face maps and degeneracy maps 

The $i$th **face map** $d_{i}^n : \Delta^{n - 1} \to \Delta^n$ is given by  $d_{i} : j \mapsto j$ for $j < i$ and $j \mapsto j + 1$ for $j \geq i$ — "skipping $i$" in the codomain. We often abbreviate $d_{i}^n$ to $d_{i}$.

The $i$th **degeneracy map** $s_{i}^n : \Delta^{n + 1} \to \Delta^{n}$ is given by $s_{i} : j \mapsto j$ for $j \leq i$ and $j \mapsto j - 1$ for $j > i$ — "repeating $i$" in the codomain. We often abbreviate $d_{i}^n$ to $d_{i}$.

---

We can understand all the maps in $\Delta$ "combinatorially".

##### _proposition:_ face maps and degeneracy maps generate $\Delta$

Every morphism $\Delta^m \to \Delta^n$ is a composition of $s_{i}$ and $d_{i}$.

All the relations between the $s_{i}$ and $d_{i}$ are generated by
$$
d_{i} s_{j} = \begin{cases}
s_{j - 1} d_{i} & i < j \\
\operatorname{id} & j \leq i \leq j + 1 \\
s_{j} d_{i - 1} &  i > j + 1
\end{cases}
$$
as well as $s_{i} s_{j} = s_{j + 1} s_{i}$ and $d_{i} d_{j} = d_{j - 1} d_{i}$ for $i < j$.

---

Then taking functors $\Delta^\text{opp} \to \mathsf{Set}$ gives us exactly the notions we want!

##### _definition:_ simplicial sets, simplex category, simplicial objects

A **simplicial set** is a collection of sets $K_{n}$ for all integers $n \geq 0$ with functions $d_{i} : K_{n} \to K_{n - 1}$ and $s_{i} : K_{n} \to K_{n + 1}$ such that
$$
d_{i} s_{j} = \begin{cases}
s_{j - 1} d_{i} & i < j \\
\operatorname{id} & j \leq i \leq j + 1 \\
s_{j} d_{i - 1} &  i > j + 1
\end{cases}
$$
as well as $s_{i} s_{j} = s_{j + 1} s_{i}$ and $d_{i} d_{j} = d_{j - 1} d_{i}$ for $i < j$.

More generally, **simplicial object** in a category $\mathscr{C}$ is a [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Functors#_definition _ (covariant, contravariant) functors|contravariant functor]] $\Delta \to \mathscr{C}$.

The simplicial objects in a category form a category under natural transformations. We denote the **category of simplicial objects in $\mathscr{C}$** by $\mathscr{C}_{\Delta}$. This is in contrast with the notation $\mathscr{C}^\Delta$ for the category of covariant functors $\Delta \to \mathscr{C}$ and in analogy with [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Morphisms of sheaves#Categories of sheaves|the notation]] $\mathscr{C}_{X}$ for the category of $\mathscr{C}$-valued sheaves on $X$.

---

Each $\Delta^n$ defines a simplicial set $h_{\Delta^n}$. Note, though $h_{\Delta^n}$ is contravariant, the functor $\Delta^n \mapsto h_{\Delta^n}$ is covariant $\Delta \to \mathsf{Set}_{\Delta}$ (a **cosimplicial simplicial set**). We will often abuse notation and write $\Delta^n$ for the simplicial set $h_{\Delta^n}$.

By [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Yoneda's lemma#_lemma _ Yoneda's fanciest lemma|Yoneda]], we can define the **$n$-simplices of a simplicial set** $X \in \mathsf{Set}_{\Delta}$ to be the morphisms $\Delta^n \to X$. We also have **face maps** of simplicial sets $h_{d_{i}} : \partial_{i} \Delta^n =  \Delta^{n - 1} \to \Delta^n$.

This is just one example standard way to get a functor $\mathscr{C} \to \mathsf{Set}_{\Delta}$. 

##### _definition:_ cosimplicial object

A **cosimplicial object** in a category $\mathscr{C}$ is a functor $\Delta \to \mathscr{C}$.

Given a standard choice of cosimplicial object $K : \Delta \to \mathscr{C}$, we often write the image of $\Delta^n$ as $\Delta^n_{\mathscr{C}}$. Then 

Recall $h_{X}$ is the contravariant functor $h_{X}(Y) = \operatorname{Mor}(X, Y)$. Then the **simplicialisation** functor $S : \mathscr{C} \to \mathsf{Set}_{\Delta}$ is given by $S(X) = h_{X} \circ K_{\mathscr{}}$.

---

### Simplicial set homology

The generality of the definition of simplicial objects allows us to make a definition of simplicial abelian groups, for example. Clearly, the free abelian group functor $\mathsf{Set} \to \mathsf{Ab}$ gives us a functor $\mathsf{Set}_{\Delta} \to \mathsf{Ab}_{\Delta}$. Then, from each simplicial abelian group, we can construct a chain complex, and then take its homology.

##### _definition:_ simplicial set homology

---

### Singular sets and geometric realisations

For the notion of simplicial sets to be useful in algebraic topology, we want a way to convert a topological space into a simplicial approximation and back. For example, a functor $\mathsf{Top} \to \mathsf{Set}_{\Delta}$ would give us a homology theory on $\mathsf{Top}$. The way we do this is the construction above with a standard cosimplicial object — parameterising the standard topological (geometric) simplices.

##### _definition:_ topological simplices

The **topological $n$-simplex** is $\Delta^{n}_\mathsf{Top} \subseteq \mathbb{R}^{n + 1}$ is the convex hull of all $n + 1$ standard basis vectors $e_{i} \in \mathbb{R}^{n + 1}$ (with the [[Topology --- math-147/notes/Subspaces#_definition _ subspace topology|subspace topology]]).

This defines a (covariant) functor $K_{\mathsf{Top}} : \Delta \to \mathsf{Top}$ by $\Delta^{n} \mapsto \Delta^{n}_\mathsf{Top}$.

---

##### _definition:_ singularisation, singular complex

Then the **singularisation** functor $S : \mathsf{Top} \to \mathsf{Set}_{\Delta}$ is the simplicialisation functor $S(X) = h_{X} \circ K_{\mathsf{Top}}$.

$S(X)$ is called the **singular complex** of $X$.

---

There is a way for us to convert this functor $\mathsf{Top} \to \mathsf{Set}_{\Delta}$ to a functor in the other direction by abstract nonsense. You just take the tensor product! of $F : \mathscr{D} \to \mathscr{C}$ and $G : \mathscr{D}^\text{opp} \to \mathscr{C}$ and get an element $G \otimes_{\mathscr{D}} F$ of $\mathscr{C}$.

### Nerves

Another (surprisingly) useful construction allows us to see categories as simplicial sets. This connects to the construction of [[UChicago --- uc-2026/notes/Classifying spaces|classifying spaces]] and the theory of [[UChicago --- uc-2026/notes/Infinity categories#_definition _ $ infty$-category|infinity categories]]

##### _definition:_ categorical simplices

---