---
tags:
- alg-top
- peter-may
- uc-2026/alg-top/9
---

Classifying manifolds is too difficult (it is in fact undecidable because the word problem is undecidable). However, we can give a weaker result that classifies manifolds that are boundaries of the same higher-dimensional manifold.

It turns out that if the Stieffel–Whitney numbers of a manifold are all zero, then the manifold is the boundary of some higher dimensional manifold. Thus, computing Stieffel–Whitney numbers of $X = X_{1} \sqcup X_{2}$ gives a weak equivalence relation (weak equivalence in a non-technical sense) on manifolds.

### The Steenrod algebra

We will construct cobordism as a **spectrum** — a sequence of spaces $E_{n}$ with homeomorphisms or homotopy equivalences $E_{n} \cong \Omega E_{n + 1}$ for all $n \in \mathbb{Z}$. We write $E_{-n} = E^n$. Then the $E^n$ define a **cohomology theory** by $E^n(X) = \operatorname{Mor}_{\mathsf{hTop}}(X, \Sigma^n E)$. 

A **cohomology operation of degree $q$** is a morphism $c : E^n \to E^{n + q}$ for all $n$ such that the following diagram commutes for each $f : X \to Y$.
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsfonts}
\begin{document}
	\begin{tikzcd}
		E^n(Y) \ar[r, "c_{*}"] \ar[d, "f^*"] & E^{n + q}(Y) \ar[d, "f^*"] \\
		E^n(X) \ar[r, "c_{*}"] & E^{n + q}(X)
	\end{tikzcd}
\end{document}
```

It turns out that the cohomology operations of degree $q$ are determined by $E^q(E)$.

Let $G$ be a group. We often write $HG$ for the spectrum given by $HG_{n} = K(G, n)$. Consider the spectrum $H \mathbb{F}_{2}$. Its cohomology operations are determined by the algebra $A^\bullet = H\mathbb{F}_{2}^\bullet(H\mathbb{F}_{2})$. We say $A^\bullet$ is the algebra of **Steenrod square operations $\operatorname{sq}^q$** for each degree $q$. They are defined by $\operatorname{sq}^0 = \operatorname{id}$, $\operatorname{sq}^1 = \beta$ where $\beta$ is the Bockstein map, and
$$
\operatorname{sq}^q(xy) = \sum_{i + j = q} \operatorname{sq}^i(x) \operatorname{sq}^j(y).
$$
Note $A^\bullet$ is a [[UChicago --- uc-2026/notes/Grading and algebras for algebraic topology#Coalgebras, bialgebras, and Hopf algebras|Hopf algebra]]. Its dual Hopf algebra $A_{\bullet}$ is a polynomial algebra over $\mathbb{F}_{2}$ generated by $x_{r}$ of degree $2^r - 1$.

### Thom spectrum

Let $\mathrm{MO}$ be some blackbox ring spectrum — it has a smash product $\mathrm{MO} \wedge \mathrm{MO} \to \mathrm{MO}$ given geometrically by taking cartesian products of manifolds.

If we look at the $H \mathbb{F}_{2}$ cohomology of $\mathrm{MO}$, we get a map $\varphi : A^\bullet \otimes H\mathbb{F}_{2}^\bullet(\mathrm{MO}) \to H\mathbb{F}_{2}^\bullet(\mathrm{MO})$. It is not so terrible to see that $\pi_{0} \mathrm{MO} = \mathbb{F}_{2}$. We claim also that $\pi_{q} \mathrm{MO} = 0$ for all negative $q$ (since there is nothing in negative dimension). Note, $H_{\bullet}(\mathrm{MO})$ is a polynomial algebra over $\mathbb{F}_{2}$ with generators in every 

Note that there is a map $A^\bullet \to H^\bullet(\mathrm{MO})$ by $a \mapsto \varphi(a \otimes 1)$. This is a monomorphism. Thus, the dual map $H_{\bullet}(\mathrm{MO}) \to A_{\bullet} \otimes H_{\bullet}(\mathrm{MO}) \to A_{\bullet}$ is an epimorphism. Write $N_{\bullet}$ for the subalgebra of $x \in H_{\bullet}(\mathrm{MO})$ with $x \mapsto 1 \otimes x$. Then since the composite is an epimorphism, we have an isomorphism $A_{\bullet} \otimes N_{\bullet} \to H_{\bullet}(\mathrm{MO})$. Thus, $N_{\bullet}$ must be a polynomial algebra with generators in each degree that is not $2^r - 1$.

Then $H^\bullet(\mathrm{MO})$ is a free $A^\bullet$-module with basis given by the basis for $N^\bullet$. This is because the tensor product was just over $\mathbb{F}_{2}$, so it has a free $\mathbb{F}_{2}$ vector space structure, and we can endow it with a free $A$-module structure. Thus, we can see from the Hurewicz map $\pi_{\bullet} \mathrm{MO} \to H_{\bullet}(\mathrm{MO})$ that $\pi_{\bullet} \mathrm{MO} \cong N_{\bullet}$ in positive degree.