---
tags:
- rising-sea/4/5
- alg-geo
- comm-alg
---

Let $A$ be a ring.

Graded rings are what [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Projective schemes|projective schemes]] are built from. They are rings with a natural notion of degree.

##### _definition:_ $\mathbb{Z}$-graded rings, homogeneous elements, degree

A **$\mathbb{Z}$-graded ring** is a ring $S_{\bullet}$ with direct sum decomposition as abelian groups $S_{\bullet} = \bigoplus_{n \in \mathbb{Z}} S_{n}$ such that multiplication is a function $S_{m} \times S_{n} \to S_{m + n}$.

Elements of some specific $S_{n}$ are called **homogeneous elements** or **forms** of **(pure) degree $n$**.

Any non-zero element of $S_{\bullet}$ is said to have **degree** corresponding to the maximal non-zero part of its direct sum decomposition.

Note that each $S_{n}$ is then an $S_{0}$-module and $S_{\bullet}$ is an $S_{0}$ algebra. We call $S_{0}$ the **base ring** and $S_{\bullet}$ a **graded ring over $S_{0}$**, especially if $S_{\bullet}$ has no elements of negative degree.

If $S_{\bullet}$ has no elements of negative degree, we say it is a **$\mathbb{Z}_{\geq 0}$-graded ring

---

From here on assume that any graded ring is a $\mathbb{Z}_{\geq 0}$-graded ring unless otherwise specified. 

##### _example:_ polynomial rings are graded by degree

The typical example we will work with is a polynomial ring like $\mathbb{C}[x_{0}, x_{1}, x_{2}]$, sometimes quotiented by a homogeneous polynomial $\mathbb{C}[x_{0}, x_{1}, x_{2}] / (x_{0}^{2} + x_{1}^{2} - x_{2}^{2})$. Here the grading is by polynomial degree.

---

In graded rings, rather than care about all ideals, we care about those that respect the grading. 

##### _definition:_ homogeneous ideal

An ideal $\mathfrak{i}_{\bullet} \subset S_{\bullet}$ is **homogeneous** if it is generated by homogeneous elements.

---

We can think about caring about homogeneity as only caring about solutions up to scaling. This is only defined for homogeneous polynomials since there is no guarantee that scaling a solution gives a solution otherwise.

Homogeneous ideals decompose into homogeneous pieces.

##### _proposition:_ ideals are homogeneous iff they contain homogeneous parts

$\mathfrak{i}_{\bullet} \subseteq S_{\bullet}$ is homogeneous if and only if it contains each degree $k$ piece of each of its elements.

###### _proof:_

Suppose $\mathfrak{i}_{\bullet}$ is homogeneous. For $f \in \mathfrak{i}_{\bullet}$, we can write
$$
f = s_{1} i_{1} + \dots + s_{n} i_{n}
$$
where each of the $s_{k} \in S_{\bullet}$ and the $i_{k}$ are homogeneous generators of $\mathfrak{i}_{\bullet}$. Writing out the direct sum decomposition of each $s_{k} = s_{k, 0} + \dots + s_{k, d}$ and grouping the $s_{k, j} {i}_{k}$ terms by degree, we get a decomposition
$$
f = f_{0} + \dots + f_{\deg f}
$$
with each $f_{k} \in \mathfrak{i}_{\bullet}$ and homogeneous of pure degree $k$ . Since the direct sum decomposition of $f$ into its degree parts is unique, we have that $\mathfrak{i}_{\bullet}$ contains each degree $k$ piece of each of its elements.

Suppose $\mathfrak{i}_{\bullet}$ contains each homogeneous parts of each element $f \in \mathfrak{i}_{\bullet}$. Then we can choose all of those homogeneous of all of those elements as a large set of homogeneous generators for $\mathfrak{i}_{\bullet}$.

---

A number of easy corollaries follow from this.

##### _corollary:_ homogeneity is closed under sum, product, intersection, radical

Suppose $\mathfrak{i}_{\bullet}, \mathfrak{j}_{\bullet} \subseteq S_{\bullet}$ are homogeneous ideals. Then $\mathfrak{i}_{\bullet} + \mathfrak{j}_{\bullet}$, $\mathfrak{i}_{\bullet} \mathfrak{j}_{\bullet}$, $\mathfrak{i}_{\bullet} \cap \mathfrak{j}_{\bullet}$, and $\sqrt{ \mathfrak{i}_{\bullet} }$ are all homogeneous ideals.

###### _proof sketch:_

$\mathfrak{i}_{\bullet} + \mathfrak{j}_{\bullet}$ contains each of the homogeneous parts of each of its elements since $\mathfrak{i}_{\bullet}$ and $\mathfrak{j}_{\bullet}$ do for their elements and the homogeneous parts of the sum are just the sum of the homogeneous parts.

Again, by polynomial multiplication, the homogeneous parts of $fg \in \mathfrak{i}_{\bullet} \mathfrak{j}_{\bullet}$ are sums of products of homogeneous parts of $f \in \mathfrak{i}_{\bullet}$ and $g \in \mathfrak{j}_{\bullet}$. But these are already in the product of the ideals.

If $f \in \mathfrak{i}_{\bullet} \cap \mathfrak{j}_{\bullet}$, both $\mathfrak{i}_{\bullet}$ and $\mathfrak{j}_{\bullet}$ contain its homogeneous parts, so $\mathfrak{i}_{\bullet} \cap \mathfrak{j}_{\bullet}$ contains its homogeneous parts.

Suppose $f \in \sqrt{ \mathfrak{i}_{\bullet} }$. Then $f^m \in \mathfrak{i}_{\bullet}$ and the homogeneous parts of $f^m$ are in $\mathfrak{i}_{\bullet}$.

>[!missing]
>proof

---

##### _corollary:_ it suffices to check primeness at homogeneous elements

A homogeneous proper ideal $\mathfrak{p}_{\bullet} \subsetneq S_{\bullet}$ is [[Abstract algebra --- math-171/notes/Prime and maximal ideals#_definition _ prime ideals|prime]] if and only if for any homogeneous $f, g \in S_{\bullet}$, if $fg \in \mathfrak{p}_{\bullet}$, then $f \in \mathfrak{p}_{\bullet}$ or $g \in \mathfrak{p}_{\bullet}$.

###### _proof:_

If $\mathfrak{p}_{\bullet}$ is prime, primeness on products of homogeneous elements follows by primeness on all products.

Suppose $\mathfrak{p}_{\bullet}$ satisfies the primeness condition for homogeneous elements. Let $fg \in \mathfrak{p}_{\bullet}$. Write $f = f_{0} + \dots + f_{m}$ and $g = g_{0} + \dots + g_{n}$ with each $f_{i}$ and $g_{i}$ of pure degree $i$. Then $fg$ has degree $0$ part $f_{0} g_{0}$, degree $1$ part $f_{0} g_{1} + f_{1} g_{0}$ and so on. Since $fg \in \mathfrak{p}_{\bullet}$ then $\mathfrak{p}_{\bullet}$ contains all of these pure degree parts. 

If $f \in \mathfrak{p}_{\bullet}$, we are done. Suppose $f \not\in \mathfrak{p}_{\bullet}$. Then, there is some least $i$ such that $f_{i} \not\in \mathfrak{p}_{\bullet}$. Since, for all $j < i$ we have $f_{j} \in \mathfrak{p}_{\bullet}$, in the degree $i$ piece we have $f_{j} g_{i - j} \in \mathfrak{p}_{\bullet}$. The only part of the sum left is then $f_{i} g_{0}$. Since $f_{i} \not\in \mathfrak{p}_{\bullet}$ we have $g_{0} \in \mathfrak{p}_{\bullet}$ by the primeness on homogeneous elements. 

We can induct up to get all the homogeneous parts of $g$. Suppose all $g_{k} \in \mathfrak{p}_{\bullet}$ for $k < \ell$. Consider the degree $i + \ell$ part of $fg$
$$
f_{0} g_{i + \ell} + \dots + f_{i} g_{\ell} + \dots + f_{i + \ell} g_{0}
$$
Due to either $f_{j}$ or $g_{j}$ we know that all the products apart from $f_{i} g_{\ell}$ are in $\mathfrak{p}_{\bullet}$. Thus, $f_{i} g_{\ell} \in \mathfrak{p}_{\bullet}$ and by primeness on homogeneous elements and $f_{i} \not\in \mathfrak{p}_{\bullet}$, we get $g_{\ell} \in \mathfrak{p}_{\bullet}$.

Since all the homogeneous parts of $g$ are in $\mathfrak{p}_{\bullet}$ we have $g \in \mathfrak{p}_{\bullet}$.

---


Finally, just as we don't want to include the point with coordinates all zero in classical projective geometry, we don't want to include the ideal $(x_{0}, \dots, x_{n})$ of a polynomial ring. More generally, this is the irrelevant ideal.

##### _definition:_ irrelevant ideal

The **irrelevant ideal** of a graded ring $S_{\bullet}$ is $S_{+} = \bigoplus_{n > 0} S_{n}$.

---

The irrelevant ideal is also helpful for defining some finiteness conditions

##### _definition:_ finitely generated graded ring, generated in degree $1$

If $S_{+}$ is a finitely generated ideal, $S_{\bullet}$ is a **finitely generated graded ring**.

If $S_{\bullet}$ is finitely generated by $S_{1}$ as an $S_{0}$ algebra, $S_{\bullet}$ is **generated in degree $1$**.

---

##### _proposition:_ finitely generated graded rings are finitely generated algebras

A graded ring $S_{\bullet}$ is a finitely generated graded ring over $A$ if and only if $S_{\bullet}$ is a finitely generated graded $A$-algebra — generated over $A$ as an algebra by finitely many homogeneous elements of positive degree.

###### _proof:_

Suppose $S_{\bullet}$ is a finitely generated graded ring. Then $S_{+}$ is finitely generated ideal of $S_{\bullet}$. 

>[!missing]
>proof

Suppose $S_{\bullet}$ is a finitely generated graded $A$-algebra. Then those same finitely many generators generate $S_{+}$ as an ideal of $S_{\bullet}$.

---

##### _corollary:_ Noetherian graded rings have Noetherian base ring

A graded ring $S_{\bullet}$ over $A$ is [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Noetherian rings and modules#_definition _ Noetherian rings|Noetherian]] if and only if $A$ is Noetherian and $S_{\bullet}$ is a finitely generated graded ring.

###### _proof sketch:_

Then $S_{\bullet}$ is a finitely generated $A$-algebra and the [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Noetherian rings and modules#_theorem _ the Hilbert basis theorem|Hilbert basis theorem]] applies.

---

Finally, graded rings play nicely with localisation.

##### _proposition:_ localisations of graded rings

Note that if $T \subseteq S_{\bullet}$ is a multiplicative subset, then $T^{-1} S_{\bullet}$ has a natural graded ring structure with $\deg_{T^{-1} S_{\bullet}} s = \deg_{S_{\bullet}} s$ and $\deg_{T^{-1} S_{\bullet}} 1 / t = - \deg_{S_{\bullet}} t$.

---