---
tags:
- alg-geo
- rising-sea/5/3
---

Let $A$ be a ring. Let $X$ be a scheme.

Noetherian schemes globalise the notion of a Noetherian ring. They are all [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Topological properties of schemes#_definition _ Noetherian topological spaces|Noetherian topological spaces]], but they are not just that.

##### _definition:_ locally Noetherian scheme, Noetherian scheme

If every affine open $\operatorname{Spec} A \subseteq X$ has $A$ a [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Noetherian rings and modules#_definition _ Noetherian rings|Noetherian ring]], then $X$ is a **locally Noetherian scheme**.

If $X$ is locally Noetherian and [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Topological properties of schemes#Quasicompactness|quasicompact]], then $X$ is a **Noetherian scheme**.

---

Note that $\mathscr{O}_{X}(X)$ need not be Noetherian for $X$ to be Noetherian.

This is one example of a general naming phenomenon where a scheme such that every affine open has property $P$ is called a locally $P$ scheme. A quasicompact locally $P$ scheme is actually $P$.

Though the definition requires every affine open to be Noetherian, we don't have to check this at every affine open. As usual, we show that Noetherianness is [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Affine-locality and affine communication#_lemma, definition _ affine communication lemma, affine-local|affine-local]], and thus, can be checked on affine open cover.

##### _proposition:_ Noetherianness is affine-local

Suppose $A$ is a ring and $(f_{1}, \dots, f_{n}) = A$.
1) If $A$ is Noetherian, then each $A_{f_{i}}$ is Noetherian.
2) If each $A_{f_{i}}$ is Noetherian, then $A$ is Noetherian.

###### _proof:_

Suppose $A$ is Noetherian. Thus, every ideal of $A$ is finitely generated. Every ideal of $A_{f_{i}}$ [[Commutative algebra --- math-189AA/notes/Localisation of a ring#_proposition _ ideals of the localisation are extended|is extended]], and so also finitely generated by the same generators (because $S^{-1} \mathfrak{i} = S^{-1} A (A \{ x_{1}, \dots, x_{n} \}) = S^{-1} A \{ x_{1}, \dots, x_{n} \}$ for $\mathfrak{i} = A \{ x_{1}, \dots, x_{n} \}$). Thus, $A_{f_{i}}$ is Noetherian.

Suppose $A$ is non-Noetherian. Let $\mathfrak{i}_{1} \subsetneq \mathfrak{i}_{2} \subsetneq \cdots \subseteq A$ be an infinite ascending chain of distinct ideals. Then, in each $A_{f_{i}}$ we have an infinite ascending chain of ideals $f_{i}^{-1} \mathfrak{i}_{1} \subseteq f_{i}^{-1} \mathfrak{i}_{2} \subseteq \cdots \subseteq A_{f_{i}}$ in each ring $A_{f_{i}}$. For each $n$, let $M = \mathfrak{i}_{k + 1} / \mathfrak{i}_{k}$ and note that $M \to \prod_{i = 1}^n M_{f_i}$ [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Quasicoherent sheaves#_proposition _ twiddlification really forms a sheaf|is injective]]. Then $\prod_{i = 1}^n M_{f_{i}} \neq 0$ and there is some non-zero $M_{f_{i}}$. That is, there is some $k$ such that $f_{i}^{-1} \mathfrak{i}_{k + 1} \neq f_{i}^{-1} \mathfrak{i}_{k}$. Since there is always some $k$ for each $n$, there is at least one chain of localised ideals that is not eventually constant. That is, at least one of the $A_{f_{i}}$ that is non-Noetherian.

---

Note that the proof of the first part also implies that Noetherian schemes have Noetherian stalks.

##### _corollary:_ Noetherian rings have Noetherian stalks

If $A$ is a Noetherian ring, then each $A_{\mathfrak{p}}$ is also a Noetherian ring.

Equivalently, if $X$ is a locally Noetherian scheme, then each $\mathscr{O}_{X, p}$ is a Noetherian ring.

---

The converse is not true in general.

The affine locality of Noetherianness implies for example that all projective schemes over a Noetherian ring are Noetherian schemes.

##### _example:_ quasiprojective schemes over a Noetherian base are Noetherian schemes

If $A$ is Noetherian, then any projective $A$-scheme $X = \operatorname{Proj} S_{\bullet}$ [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Graded rings#_corollary _ Noetherian graded rings have Noetherian base ring|must have]] $S_{\bullet}$ Noetherian. By the argument above, each localisation $(S_{\bullet})_{f}$ is also Noetherian. Then, again we [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Graded rings#_corollary _ Noetherian graded rings have Noetherian base ring|must have]] each $((S_{\bullet})_{f})_{0}$ Noetherian. Thus, $X$ is covered by a base of affine Noetherian schemes $D_{+}(f)$. Note that $X$ is [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Topological properties of schemes#_example _ projective schemes are qcqs|quasicompact]] since all projective schemes are. Thus, $X$ is Noetherian.

We can run exactly this argument for any quasiprojective $U \subseteq X$ as well.

>[!warning]
> Our proof that $S_{\bullet}$ Noetherian implies $(S_{\bullet})_{0}$ Noetherian only works if $S_{\bullet}$ has no units of positive degree, which is not the case for $(S_{\bullet})_{f}$. There is some manual fix available by assuming that $S_{\bullet}$ is generated in degree $1$ and then looking at things that look like the standard affine charts on $\mathbb{P}^n$

---

Noetherian schemes are really nice, especially topologically!

##### _proposition:_ Noetherian schemes are Noetherian topological spaces

If $X$ is a Noetherian scheme, then its underlying topological space is [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Topological properties of schemes#_definition _ Noetherian topological spaces|Noetherian]]

###### _proof:_

Suppose $X$ is Noetherian with a cover $X = \bigcup_{i \in \mathscr{I}} \operatorname{Spec} A_{i}$ by Noetherian affine schemes. Since $X$ is quasicompact, we can reduce to a finite cover. Since each Noetherian affine scheme [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Noetherian rings and modules#_proposition _ Noetherian rings have Noetherian affine schemes|is a Noetherian topological space]], the topological space $X$ is a finite union of Noetherian topological spaces [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Topological properties of schemes#_proposition _ Noetherianness is preserved by finite covers|and thus]], Noetherian itself.

---

This means that Noetherian schemes [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Topological properties of schemes#_proposition _ Noetherian spaces break up into finitely many irreducible components|have finitely many irreducible components]]. Even local Noetherianness is enough to have nice topological properties.

##### _proposition:_ locally Noetherian schemes are quasiseparated

If $X$ is locally Noetherian, it is [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Topological properties of schemes#_definition _ quasiseparated|quasiseparated]].

###### _proof:_

It suffices to show that any intersection of affine opens $\operatorname{Spec} A, \operatorname{Spec} B \subseteq X$ is covered by finitely many affine opens. The intersection $\operatorname{Spec} A \cap \operatorname{Spec} B$ is open in $\operatorname{Spec} A$. Since $\operatorname{Spec} A$ is a Noetherian topological space, [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Topological properties of schemes#_proposition _ Noetherian spaces have (quasi)compact open subsets|its open sets are quasicompact]]. Thus, $\operatorname{Spec} A \cap \operatorname{Spec} B$ is covered by finitely many affine opens.

---

Noetherianness also makes [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Reduced and integral schemes#_definition _ integral scheme|integrality]] a stalk-local condition (as long as the scheme is connected). That is, the only Noetherian schemes that have integral stalks but are not integral are disconnected.

##### _proposition:_ Noetherian conditions for integrality

A Noetherian scheme $X$ is integral if and only if $X$ is non-empty, connected, and all stalks are integral domains.

###### _proof:_

Let $X$ be a Noetherian scheme.

If $X$ is integral, then $X$ is non-empty, irreducible and [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Topological properties of schemes#_proposition _ irreducible spaces are connected|thus, connected]], and [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Reduced and integral schemes#_example _ integrality is not stalk-local|has integral stalks]].

Suppose now that $X$ is non-empty, connected and all stalks are integral domains. Since $X$ is a Noetherian topological space it has finitely many irreducible components. Since it is connected, the irreducible components cannot be disconnected — any two irreducible components intersect. We claim that if two distinct irreducible components intersect, then there is a non-integral stalk. Thus, there must be only one irreducible component — $X$ must be irreducible. Since $X$ is [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Reduced and integral schemes#_proposition _ integral schemes are one piece, no fuzz|irreducible and reduced, it is integral]].

We show that the two distinct irreducible components intersecting implies non-integral stalks by reducing to an affine case. Suppose $X = Y \cup Z$ is a union of proper irreducible closed subsets and $p \in Y \cap Z$. Then choose a connected affine open neighbourhood $\operatorname{Spec} A \ni p$. Since $\operatorname{Spec} A$ is open in irreducibles $Y$ and $Z$, [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Topological properties of schemes#_proposition _ open sets of an irreducible space are dense|it is dense in both]]. Thus, it intersects both open sets $Y \setminus Z$ and $Z \setminus Y$. This means that $\operatorname{Spec} A = V(\mathfrak{i}) \cup V(\mathfrak{j})$ is a disjoint of proper closed subsets $V(\mathfrak{i}) = Y \cap \operatorname{Spec} A$ and $V(\mathfrak{j}) = Z \cap \operatorname{Spec} A$. Let $p = \mathfrak{p} \in \operatorname{Spec} A$.

Note that since $V(\mathfrak{i}) \neq \operatorname{Spec} A \neq V(\mathfrak{j})$, neither $\mathfrak{i}$ nor $\mathfrak{j}$ is the $0$ ideal. However, since $\operatorname{Spec} A = V(\mathfrak{i}) \cup V(\mathfrak{j}) = V(\mathfrak{i} \mathfrak{j})$ we have $\sqrt{ \mathfrak{i} \mathfrak{j} } = \sqrt{ 0 }$. If $\mathfrak{i} \mathfrak{j} \neq 0$, $A$ has non-zero nilpotents (the non-zero elements of $\mathfrak{ij}$) and [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Reduced and integral schemes#_proposition _ reduced affine schemes are reduced rings|thus]], $\mathscr{O}_{X, p} = A_{\mathfrak{p}}$ is non-reduced and non-integral. If $\mathfrak{i} \mathfrak{j} = 0$, then $A$ is non-integral. If $\mathfrak{i} \mathfrak{j} = 0$, then we have non-zero $i \in \mathfrak{i}, j \in \mathfrak{j}$ with $ij = 0$. 

We claim that there is some $A_{\mathfrak{m}}$ in which these are non-zero, and thus, $A_{\mathfrak{m}}$ is non-integral. Specifically, we claim that $\operatorname{Ann}_{A} \mathfrak{i} + \operatorname{Ann}_{A} \mathfrak{j}$ is a proper ideal of $A$. Then it is contained in a maximal ideal $\mathfrak{m}$. Since this maximal ideal contains all $s \in A$ such that $si = 0$ or $sj = 0$, then $i, j$ are non-zero in $A_{\mathfrak{m}}$ and have $ij = 0$. That is, $A_{\mathfrak{m}}$ is non-integral.

Alternatively, we can note that $V(\mathfrak{i})$ and $V(\mathfrak{j})$ are actually irreducible components, so $\mathfrak{i}, \mathfrak{j}$ are distinct minimal prime ideals of $A$. But then, localising at $\mathfrak{p}$ gives two distinct minimal prime ideals of $A_{\mathfrak{p}}$ — $\mathfrak{i}_{\mathfrak{p}}$ and $\mathfrak{j}_{\mathfrak{p}}$. Since integral domains have a unique minimal prime $0$, the local ring $A_{\mathfrak{p}}$ and thus, the stalk $\mathscr{O}_{X, p}$ is not integral.

---