---
tags:
- alg-geo
- rising-sea/5/2
---

Let $X$ be a scheme.

### Reducedness

For affine schemes we were disturbed that functions weren't necessarily determined by their values at points. However, when $A$ was a [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Affine schemes#_definition _ reduced (ring)|reduced ring]] with no nilpotents, we saw that functions on $\operatorname{Spec} A$ were then determined by their values. To refine this to our new notion of the [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Ringed spaces#_definition _ values of functions, vanishing|values of functions]] on schemes, we require no nilpotents in the stalks.

##### _definition:_ reduced (schemes)

$X$ is a **reduced scheme** if each stalk $\mathscr{O}_{X, p}$ is a reduced ring.

---

Note then, by definition, reducedness is stalk-local.

This generalises our local model of reduced schemes as reduced rings.

##### _proposition:_ reduced affine schemes are reduced rings

$A$ is a reduced ring if and only if $\operatorname{Spec} A$ is a reduced scheme.

###### _proof:_

Suppose $A$ is reduced. Suppose $x \in A_{\mathfrak{p}}$ has $x^n / 1^n = 0$. Then $s x^n = 0$ for some $s \not\in \mathfrak{p}$, so $(sx)^n = 0$. It follows that $sx = 0$, and so $x / 1 = 0$.

Suppose $A$ is not reduced with non-zero $x$ having $x^n = 0$. Then consider $\mathfrak{m}$, the maximal ideal generated by all the zero-divisors of $x$ — all $z$ such that $zx = 0$. In $A_{\mathfrak{m}}$ we have $x \neq 0$, since $sx = 0$ is not possible for $s \not\in \mathfrak{m}$. However, $x$ is still nilpotent in $A_{\mathfrak{m}}$.

---

##### _example:_ non-reduced affine scheme, and a reduced subscheme

$X = \operatorname{Spec} \mathbb{F}[x, y] / (y^{2}, xy)$ is non-reduced — it is the intersection of the fuzzy $x$-axis $V(y^{2})$ with the union $V(x) \cup V(y)$ of $x$ and $y$-axes. Thus, it looks like the affine line with some vertical fuzz around the origin. In particular, we have $y \neq 0$ but $y^{2} = 0$.

Since $(\mathbb{F}[x, y] / (y^{2}, xy))_{x} = \mathbb{F}[x, y]_{x} / (y^{2}, xy)_{x} = \mathbb{F}[x]_{x}$, we have that $D(x) \subseteq X$ is a reduced open subscheme. Since the stalks on $D(x)$ are all the same, we have that in fact $(x, y)$ is the only point in $X$ that has non-reduced stalk.

---

Note however that a reduced ring of global sections $\mathscr{O}_{X}(X)$ is not sufficient to ensure that a (non-affine) scheme is reduced.

##### _example:_ non-reduced scheme with reduced global sections

The scheme cut out by $x^{2} = 0$ in $\mathbb{P}_{\mathbb{F}}^{2}$ is non-reduced, but has ring of global sections $\mathbb{F}$, which is reduced.

>[!missing]
>proof

---

This gives us some equivalent characterisations of reduced schemes.

##### _corollary:_ affine-local characterisations of reduced schemes

$X$ is a reduced scheme if and only if every $\mathscr{O}_{X}(U)$ is reduced.

$X$ is a reduced scheme if and only if every affine open $\operatorname{Spec} A \subseteq X$ has $A$ a reduced ring.

$X$ is a reduced scheme if and only if it has a cover by reduced affine opens.

###### _proof:_

Suppose $\mathscr{O}_{X}(U)$ is reduced. Then each $\operatorname{Spec} A$ is a reduced scheme, so each stalk $\mathscr{O}_{X, p} = A_{\mathfrak{p}}$ is a reduced ring. That is, $X$ is reduced.

Suppose $X$ is reduced and $f^n = 0$ in $\mathscr{O}_{X}(U)$. Then its germ $f_{\mid p}$ is nilpotent, and thus, $0$ in each reduced stalk $\mathscr{O}_{X, p}$. Since $\mathscr{O}_{X}(U) \to \prod_{p \in U} \mathscr{O}_{X, p}$ [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Stalk-locality and compatible germs#_proposition _ sections are stalk-local|is injective]] and $f \mapsto (0)_{p \in U}$ we must have $f = 0$ in $\mathscr{O}_{X}(U)$. That is, $\mathscr{O}_{X}(U)$ is reduced.

Since we only needed each $\operatorname{Spec} A$ to be reduced, we can just check the affine opens. In fact, even if we just have an open cover by reduced affine opens, we still get $\mathscr{O}_{X, p} = A_{\mathfrak{p}}$ at each $p \in X$, and thus, that $X$ is reduced.

---

This also does in fact serve our purpose of allowing functions to be determined by values.

##### _proposition:_ functions are determined by values on reduced schemes

Suppose $X$ is a reduced scheme. If $f, g \in \mathscr{O}_{X}(X)$ have $f(p) = g(p)$ at each point $p \in X$, then $f = g$.

###### _proof:_

We want to show $\mathscr{O}_{X}(X) \to \prod_{p \in X} \mathscr{O}_{X, p} \to \prod_{p \in X} \kappa(p)$ is injective.

Suppose we have $f \mapsto 0$. Then we have $f_{\mid U} \mapsto 0$ on some (reduced) affine open $U = \operatorname{Spec} A$ as well. Since we can factor this as $A \mapsto A / \mathfrak{p} \mapsto A_{\mathfrak{p}} / \mathfrak{p} A_{\mathfrak{p}}$ at each point (with the second map injective) we have $f_{\mid U} \mapsto f_{\mid U} + \mathfrak{p} \mapsto 0$, and thus, $f \in \mathfrak{p}$ for each $\mathfrak{p}$. But then $f_{\mid U} \in \mathfrak{N}_{A} = (0)$. Since each $f_{\mid U} = 0$, we have $f = 0$.

---

Finally, we describe a global analogue of "vanishing everywhere implies nilpotent" on quasicompact schemes.

##### _proposition:_ vanishing everywhere implies nilpotent, globally

Suppose $X$ is a [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Topological properties of schemes#Quasicompactness|quasicompact]] scheme. If $f \in \mathscr{O}_{X}(X)$ vanishes at every point, then $f$ is nilpotent in $\mathscr{O}_{X}(X)$.

###### _proof sketch:_

Consider a finite cover of  by affine opens. Since $f$ vanishes at every point on those affine opens, $f$ is nilpotent on each one. Since there are finitely many, we can choose the highest power and get $f$ nilpotent on $X$.

---

This is not true if $X$ is not quasicompact (for example, $\varepsilon$ vanishes at all points of $\coprod_{n = 0}^\infty k[\varepsilon] / (\varepsilon^n)$, but is not zero).

>[!missing]
>reducedness is not open, but can be checked on closed points

### Integral schemes

Integrality is a stronger condition than reducedness. Integrality means "irreducible and reduced" or "one piece, no fuzz", and also implies a lot of other nice properties.

##### _definition:_ integral scheme

A scheme $X$ is **integral** if it is non-empty and $\mathscr{O}_{X}(U)$ is an integral domain for each non-empty $U \subseteq X$.

---

Again, the notion of an integral scheme agrees with our affine model of an integral domain.

##### _proposition:_ integral affine schemes are integral domains

$A$ is an integral domain if and only if $\operatorname{Spec} A$ is an integral scheme.

###### _proof:_

Suppose $A$ is an integral domain. Then $A$ has no nilpotents (so $\operatorname{Spec} A$ is reduced), and has a minimal prime ideal $(0)$ (so $\operatorname{Spec} A$ is irreducible). Thus, $\operatorname{Spec} A$ is integral.

Suppose $\operatorname{Spec} A$ is integral. Then $\mathscr{O}_{\operatorname{Spec} A}(\operatorname{Spec} A) = A$ is integral.

---

This allows us to prove that, despite how nice integrality is, it is not stalk-local.

##### _example:_ integrality is not stalk-local

Integrality is not stalk local. For example, the disjoint union of two integral schemes is not integral, but has every stalk integral. It turns out that requiring connectedness is enough to recover integrality from integral stalks — integrality is locally stalk local.

---

We now prove the "one piece, no fuzz" thing.

##### _proposition:_ integral schemes are one piece, no fuzz

A scheme is integral if and only if it is [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Topological properties of schemes#_definition _ irreducibility, reducible|irreducible]] and reduced.

###### _proof:_

Suppose $X$ is integral. Then since every $\mathscr{O}_{X}(U)$ is integral, every affine open is reduced, and thus, $X$ is reduced. Since $\mathscr{O}_{X}(U \sqcup V) = \mathscr{O}_{X}(U) \times \mathscr{O}_{X}(V)$ and the product of any two non-zero rings is not integral, we must have that there are no disjoint unions of open sets in $X$. That is, any two non-empty open sets intersect [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Topological properties of schemes#_proposition _ open set characterisation of irreducibility|which implies]] $X$ is irreducible.

Suppose $X$ is irreducible and reduced. Then each affine open $\operatorname{Spec} A$ [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Topological properties of schemes#_proposition _ open sets of an irreducible space are irreducible|is irreducible]] and is reduced. This means [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Topological properties of schemes#_proposition _ an algebraic characterisation of irreducible affine schemes|the nilradical is prime]], and $\mathfrak{N} = 0$. That is, $(0)$ is prime, so $A$ is an integral domain. 

Suppose $f, g \in \mathscr{O}_{X}(U)$ have $fg = 0$. Then on some affine open $\operatorname{Spec} A \subseteq U$ we have (say, without loss of generality) $f = 0$. Since $U$ is irreducible, any two $\operatorname{Spec} A, \operatorname{Spec} B \subseteq U$ have non-empty open intersection, and thus, [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Topological properties of schemes#_proposition _ open sets of an irreducible space are dense|dense]] intersection in each irreducible affine open. 

The subset of $\operatorname{Spec} B$ where $f$ vanishes is closed, and since it is dense, the intersection has closure $\overline{\operatorname{Spec} A \cap \operatorname{Spec} B} = \operatorname{Spec} B$. Thus, $f$ has value $0$ at every point of $\operatorname{Spec} B$. Since $B$ is reduced, $f = 0$ on $\operatorname{Spec} B$. Since $f = 0$ on every affine open subset of $U$, $f = 0$ on all of $U$ by gluing.

---

Integral schemes not only have a notion of rational functions. Interestingly, we don't just choose the fraction field of global sections. Instead, we note that as $X$ is irreducible, [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Topological properties of schemes#_proposition _ irreducible closed sets are in bijection with points|it has a generic point]] $\eta$, and we take the stalk at that generic point.

##### _definition:_ rational functions, function field

Suppose $X$ is an integral scheme. Then the **rational functions** on $X$ are the elements of the **function field** $K(X) = \mathscr{O}_{X, \eta}$ for $\eta$ the generic point of $X$.

---

When $X$ is affine, this corresponds to the obvious intuition $K(A) = Q(A)$. In fact, $K(X) = Q(A)$ for *any* affine open $\operatorname{Spec} A \subseteq X$.

##### _proposition:_ rational functions can be computed on affine opens

For any affine open $\operatorname{Spec} A$ of an integral scheme $X$, there is an isomorphism $K(X) \cong Q(A)$.

###### _proof:_

Suppose $\eta$ is the generic point of $X$. Then since $\operatorname{Spec} A \subseteq X$ is open, we have $\eta \in \operatorname{Spec} A$, and its closure in $\operatorname{Spec} A$ is all of $\operatorname{Spec} A$. But an integral affine scheme already has a [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/The ideal of vanishing functions#_corollary _ irreducible closed sets have unique generic points|unique]] generic point $(0)$. Thus, $\eta = (0)$. Thus,
$$
K(X) = \mathscr{O}_{X, \eta} = A_{(0)} = Q(A).
$$

---

Finally, integral schemes satisfy a nice property that allows us to think of sections over different rings to all be part of the ring of rational functions.

##### _proposition:_ restriction maps on integral schemes are inclusions

Suppose $X$ is integral. Then, for any non-empty open subsets $U \subseteq V$, the restriction $\mathscr{O}_{X}(V) \to \mathscr{O}_{X}(U)$ is injective.

###### _proof sketch:_

We can do this by abstract nonsense. For affine opens $\operatorname{Spec} A \subseteq U$ and $\operatorname{Spec} B \subseteq V$  $\mathscr{O}_{X}(V) \to \mathscr{O}_{X}(U)$ can be thought of as the limit of all maps $B \to A$ or more specifically, $\mathscr{O}_{X}(\operatorname{Spec} B) \to \mathscr{O}_{X}(\operatorname{Spec} A)$ for $\operatorname{Spec} A \subseteq \operatorname{Spec} B$. But then $B \to A$ is a localisation of an integral domain and thus, injective. Since [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Exact functors#_example _ kernels commute with limits|kernels commute with limits]], we have
$$
\ker \operatorname{res}_{V, U} = \lim \ker (B \to A) = \lim 0 = 0. 
$$

>[!warning]
> assumes $\operatorname{Spec} B \subseteq \operatorname{Spec} A$ must be a distinguished open

---

##### _corollary:_ maps to the fraction field are inclusions

For any $U \subseteq X$, the natural map $\mathscr{O}_{X}(U) \to \mathscr{O}_{X, \eta} = K(X)$ is injective.

###### _proof:_

Factor $\mathscr{O}_{X}(U) \to K(X)$ as 
$$
\mathscr{O}_{X}(U) \to \mathscr{O}_{X}(\operatorname{Spec} A) = A \to K(X) = Q(A)
$$
for some non-empty affine open $\operatorname{Spec} A$. $A \to Q(A)$ is injective since $A$ is integral. $\mathscr{O}_{X}(U) \to A$ is injective by the previous result.

Note, we can choose $\operatorname{Spec} A \subseteq U$ because [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Schemes#_proposition _ affine opens form a base|affine opens form a base]].

---

This makes gluing easy — $f_{i}$ on $U_{i}$ glue to some $f$ over $U$ if and only if they are all the same as $f$ in $K(X)$.