---
tags:
- rising-sea/1/2
- math-189AA/20
- uc-2026/alg-top/2
- comm-alg
- alg
- cat-th
---

Let $A$ be a (commutative, unital) [[Abstract algebra --- math-171/notes/Rings#What's a ring?|ring]].

Tensor products (like localisation) are an algebraic construction that can be made clearer with a definition by universal property. The tensor product (over $A$) of $A$-modules $M$ and $N$ is usually defined as consisting of all $A$-linear combinations of symbols $m \otimes n$ (with $m \in M$ and $n \in N$) under the equivalence relations that $\otimes$ distributes over addition in both, $M$ and $N$ and $a$. Formally, we could define

##### _definition:_ tensor product

The tensor product (over $A$) of $A$-modules $M$ and $N$ is
$$
M \otimes_{A} N = F_{A}(M \times N) / U
$$
Here $U$ is the submodule generated by
$$
\{ (m_{1} + m_{2}, n_{1} + n_{2}) - (m_{1}, n_{1}) - (m_{1}, n_{2}) - (m_{2}, n_{1}) - (m_{2}, n_{2}) \} \cup \{ (am, n) - a(m, n) \} \cup \{ (m, an) - a(m, n) \}
$$
$F_{A}(M \times N)$ is the free $A$-module over the (set-theoretic) product $M \times N$.

We write $m \otimes n$ for the equivalence class of $(m, n)$.

---

Note that when $A$ is clear, we omit it in the subscript, writing $M \otimes N$. Also note that clearly $M \otimes N \cong N \otimes M$. Finally, note that since $M \otimes_{A} N$ is a quotient of the free $A$-module over $M \times N$, to define an $A$-module homomorphism from the tensor product, it suffices to define the value it takes on each $m \otimes n$ and verify that each generator of $U$ is sent to zero.

##### _example:_ tensor product of quotient rings

Say for concreteness we want to understand the tensor product $\mathbb{Z} / 10 \mathbb{Z} \otimes_{\mathbb{Z}} \mathbb{Z} / 12 \mathbb{Z}$. We claim that $\mathbb{Z} / 10 \mathbb{Z} \otimes_{\mathbb{Z}} \mathbb{Z} / 12 \mathbb{Z} \cong \mathbb{Z} / 2 \mathbb{Z}$.

Consider any $m \otimes n$ in the tensor product. Since the elements of the $\mathbb{Z}$-modules are also elements of $\mathbb{Z}$, we have $m \otimes n = mn (1 \otimes 1)$. Consider the $\mathbb{Z}$-module map (or equivalently, group homomorphism) $\mathbb{Z} \to \mathbb{Z} / 10 \mathbb{Z} \otimes \mathbb{Z} / 12 \mathbb{Z}$ by $n \mapsto n(1 \otimes 1)$. Since
$$
\begin{align}
2n(1 \otimes 1) & = (12 n - 10n)(1 \otimes 1) \\
 & = n(12 \otimes 1) - n(1 \otimes 10) \\
 & = 0n - 0n \\
 & = 0
\end{align}
$$
(and $1(1 \otimes 1) \neq 0$) in the tensor product, it has kernel $2 \mathbb{Z}$.

In general, we have $\mathbb{Z} / (m) \otimes_{\mathbb{Z}} \mathbb{Z} / (n) \cong \mathbb{Z} / (m, n)$ and in fact, $A / \mathfrak{i} \otimes_{A} A / \mathfrak{j} \cong A / (\mathfrak i + \mathfrak j)$ for the same reason.

---

While it is sort of clear why we may want to consider the tensor product (a priori, and from this definition), the definition doesn't do the best job at this. A better definition shows that $M \otimes N$ satisfies a universal property.

##### _proposition:_ the universal property of tensor products

Given $A$-modules $M$ and $N$, the tensor product is the unique $A$-module $M \otimes_{A} N$ with a bilinear map $t : M \times N \to M \otimes_{A} N$ such that every bilinear map from the ($\mathsf{Mod}_{A}$) [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Universal properties and why categories?#_construction _ products|product]] $M \times N \to V$ factors as the composition of $t$ and a unique linear map $M \otimes_{A} N \to V$.

That is, it is [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Universal properties and why categories?#_example _ initial and final objects in specific categories|initial]] among (modules with) bilinear maps from $M \times N$.

###### _proof:_

First we show that this universal property defines the tensor product up to unique isomorphism. Suppose $T'$ with bilinear map $t' : M \times N \to T'$ also satisfies the universal property of the tensor product. Thus, the bilinear map $t : M \times N \to M \otimes N$ factors uniquely as $M \times N \to T' \to M \otimes N$ and $t' : M \times N \to T$ factors as $M \times N \to M \otimes N \to T'$. 

If we write $\tau'$ for  $T' \to M \otimes N$ and $\tau$ for $M \otimes N \to T'$, then we get $\tau' \circ \tau : M \otimes N \to M \otimes N$ and we claim $t : M \times N \to M \otimes N$ factors through it. This follows since the diagram
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsfonts}
\begin{document}
	\begin{tikzcd}
		M \times N \ar[r, "t"] \ar[d, "t"] \ar[rd, "t'"] & M \otimes N \ar[d, "\tau"] \\
		M \otimes N & T' \ar[l, "\tau'"]
	\end{tikzcd}
\end{document}
```
commutes. Specifically, we already know $t'$ factors as $\tau \circ t$ and $t$ factors as $\tau' \circ t'$ so $t$ factors as $\tau' \circ \tau \circ t$. However, $t$ already factors through $\operatorname{id} : M \otimes N \to M \otimes N$, so $\tau' \circ \tau = \operatorname{id}_{M \otimes N}$. Similarly, $\tau \circ \tau' = \operatorname{id}_{T'}$ and thus, they are (unique) inverse isomorphisms. 

Now we show that our definition of $M \otimes N$ actually satisfies the universal property. Note that the natural map $t : M \times N \to M \otimes N$ by $(m, n) \mapsto m \otimes n$ is bilinear. Suppose $\varphi : M \times N \to V$ is bilinear. Then we claim the map $\tau : M \otimes N \to V$ by $m \otimes n \mapsto \varphi(m, n)$ is well-defined and linear. This follows easily by checking that it is well-defined as a map on $F_{A}(M \times N)$ and that its kernel includes $U$ such that $F_{A}(M \times N) / U \cong M \otimes N$. That in turn follows directly from the fact that $\tau$ is bilinear. Clearly, $\varphi = \tau \circ t$. Finally, $\tau$ is unique since $\varphi = \tau \circ t$ determines $\tau$ on the spanning set of all $m \otimes n$.

---

### Tensoring is nice

Tensoring is really nice!

##### _proposition:_ some nice isomorphisms of tensor products

For $A$-modules $L, M, N$ we have
1) $A \otimes A \cong A$ by $a \otimes b \mapsto ab$
2) $M \otimes N \cong N \otimes M$ by $m \otimes n \mapsto n \otimes m$
3) $(M \otimes N) \otimes L \cong M \otimes (N \otimes L)$ by $(m \otimes n) \otimes \ell \mapsto m \otimes (n \otimes \ell)$
4) $A \otimes M \cong M$ by $a \otimes m \mapsto am$
5) $A / \mathfrak{i} \otimes M \cong M / \mathfrak{i} M$ by $\overline{a} \otimes m \mapsto \overline{a} m$.

---

It is also nice in a more abstract nonsense sense — commuting with lots of natural functors. For one it is functorial and preserves (right) exact sequences. We will later define the notion of a right-exact functor in appropriate generality, but here it can be understood in the classical sense of exactness.

##### _proposition:_ tensoring is functorial and right-exact

The map of objects $\mathsf{Mod}_{A} \to \mathsf{Mod}_{A}$ by $M \mapsto M \otimes N$ naturally extends to a covariant [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Functors#_definition _ (covariant, contravariant) functors|functor]]. Further, this functor is right-exact — if
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsfonts}
\begin{document}
	\begin{tikzcd}
		M_{1} \ar[r] & M_{2} \ar[r] & M_{3} \ar[r] & 0
	\end{tikzcd}
\end{document}
```
is [[Abstract algebra --- math-171/notes/Exact sequences#_definition _ exact sequence|exact]], then
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsfonts}
\begin{document}
	\begin{tikzcd}
		M_{1} \otimes N \ar[r] & M_{2} \otimes N \ar[r] & M_{3} \otimes N \ar[r] & 0
	\end{tikzcd}
\end{document}
```
is exact.

###### _proof:_

We claim that $F : \mathsf{Mod}_{A} \to \mathsf{Mod}_{A}$ defined on objects by $M \mapsto M \otimes N$ and on homomorphisms $\varphi : M_{1} \to M_{2}$ by $\varphi \mapsto \varphi_{*}$ where $\varphi_{*}(m \otimes n) = \varphi(m) \otimes n$ is a functor. To do this requires showing that $\varphi_{*}$ is a well-defined $A$-module homomorphism $M_{1} \otimes N \to M_{2} \otimes N$, $\operatorname{id}_{M, *} = \operatorname{id}_{M \otimes N}$ and $(\psi \circ \varphi)_{*} = \psi_{*} \circ \varphi_{*}$ (for some second map $\psi : M_{2} \to M_{3}$).

$\varphi_{*}$ is clearly a well-defined linear map on $F_{A}(M \times N)$ since it is defined by its values on the basis of $F_{A}(M \times N)$. It's easy to show that it vanishes on $U$ such that $F_{A}(M \times N) / U \cong M \otimes N$ —
$$
\varphi_{*}(a m \otimes n) = \varphi(am) \otimes n = a(\varphi(m) \otimes n) = \varphi(m) \otimes an = \varphi_{*}(m \otimes an)
$$
and
$$
\varphi_{*}((m_{1} + m_{2}) \otimes n) = \varphi_{}(m_{1} + m_{2}) \otimes n = \varphi(m_{1}) \otimes n + \varphi(m_{2}) \otimes n = \varphi_{*}(m_{1} \otimes n + m_{2} \otimes n).
$$
(the symmetric result in the second factor follows similarly).

It's clear that we have $\operatorname{id}_{M, *} = \operatorname{id}_{M \otimes N}$ on every basis vector $m \otimes n$, and thus, they are equal as maps —
$$
\operatorname{id}_{M, *}(m \otimes n) = \operatorname{id}_{M}(m) \otimes n = m \otimes n = \operatorname{id}_{M \otimes N}(m \otimes n).
$$
Similarly, $(\psi \circ \varphi)_{*} = \psi_{*} \circ \varphi_{*}$ on every basis vector, and thus, as maps —
$$
(\psi \circ \varphi)_{*}(m \otimes n) = \psi \circ \varphi(m) \otimes n = \psi_{*}(\varphi(m) \otimes n) = \psi_{*} \circ \varphi_{*}(m \otimes n).
$$

Now we show $F$ is right exact. Suppose
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsfonts}
\begin{document}
	\begin{tikzcd}
		M_{1} \ar[r] & M_{2} \ar[r] & M_{3} \ar[r] & 0
	\end{tikzcd}
\end{document}
```
is exact with maps $\varphi_{i} : M_{i} \to M_{i + 1}$. Then $\varphi_{2} : M_{2} \to M_{3}$ is surjective and $\operatorname{img} \varphi_{1} = \ker \varphi_{2}$. We want to show the same for $\varphi_{i, *}$. 

Note that $\varphi_{2, *} : M_{2} \otimes N \to M_{3} \otimes N$ is surjective on basis elements — for any $m_{3} \otimes n$ with $\varphi_{2}(m_{2}) = m_{3}$, we have $\varphi_{2, *}(m_{2} \otimes n) = m_{3} \otimes n$. Thus, $\varphi_{2, *}$ is surjective. 

Suppose $\sum_{i} m_{2, i} \otimes n_{i} \in \operatorname{img} \varphi_{1, *}$. Thus,
$$
\sum_{i} m_{2, i} \otimes n_{i} = \varphi_{1, *}\left( \sum_{j} m_{1, j} \otimes n_{j} \right) = \sum_{j} \varphi_{1}(m_{1, j}) \otimes n_{j}.
$$
It follows that
$$
\varphi_{2, *}\left( \sum_{i} m_{2, i} \otimes n_{i} \right) = \sum_{j} \varphi_{2}(\varphi_{1}(m_{1}, j)) \otimes n_{j} = 0
$$
by exactness of the original sequence ($\varphi_{2} \circ \varphi_{1} = 0$). Thus, $\sum_{i} m_{2, i} \otimes n_{i} \in \ker \varphi_{2, *}$ and $\operatorname{img} \varphi_{1, *} \subseteq \ker \varphi_{2, *}$. The opposite inclusion is more involved.

Since $\operatorname{img} \varphi_{1, *} \subseteq \ker \varphi_{2, *}$ we have a map $M_{2} \otimes N / \operatorname{img} \varphi_{1, *} \to M_{2} \otimes N / \ker \varphi_{2, *} \cong M_{3} \otimes N$. We claim there is an inverse map $M_{3} \otimes N \to M_{2} \otimes N / \operatorname{img} \varphi_{1, *}$. Consider the bilinear map $(m_{3}, n) \mapsto m_{2} \otimes n + \operatorname{img} \varphi_{1, *}$ for some $m_{2}$ with $\varphi_{2}(m_{2}) = m_{3}$. It is well-defined since any two $m_{2}, m_{2}'$ with $\varphi_{2}(m_{2}) = \varphi_{2}(m_{2}')$ differ by an element of $\operatorname{img} \varphi_{1}$ and thus, their tensors differ by an element of $\operatorname{img} \varphi_{1, *}$. It is linear in $m_{3}$ by the linearity of $\varphi_{2}$ and it is linearity in $n$ by the tensor relation $m_{2} \otimes (n + n') = m_{2} \otimes n + m_{2} \otimes n'$. It defines a map $\psi : M_{3} \otimes N \to M_{2} \otimes N / \operatorname{img} \varphi_{1, *}$, and it is clearly inverse to the map in the opposite direction. Thus, $M_{2} \otimes N / \operatorname{img} \varphi_{1, *} \cong M_{2} \otimes N / \ker \varphi_{2, *}$. Exactness follows — $\operatorname{img} \varphi_{1, *} = \operatorname{ker} \varphi_{2, *}$.

---
 
We've seen already that tensoring with a ring on the left can look like allowing scalars in the "left" module. We can formalise this intuition.

##### _proposition:_ tensoring with a ring as extension of scalars

If $M$ is an $A$-module and $B$ is a ring, given an $A$-module structure by a morphism $A \to B$, then $B \otimes_{A} M$ is also a $B$-module. Further, the map $M \mapsto B \otimes_{A} M$ extends to a functor $\mathsf{Mod}_{A} \to \mathsf{Mod}_{B}$.

###### _proof sketch:_

Define the $B$-module structure on $B \otimes_{A} M$ by $b_{1}(b_{2} \otimes m) = (b_{1} b_{2}) \otimes m$. Further, for $\varphi : M \to N$ as $A$-modules, define $\varphi_{*} : B \otimes_{A} M \to B \otimes_{A} N$ by $\varphi_{*}(b \otimes m) = b \otimes \varphi(m)$. Clearly, $(\psi \circ \varphi)_{*} = \psi_{*} \circ \varphi_{*}$.

---

In fact, this turns the tensor product of two rings into a ring in its own right.

##### _proposition:_ tensor product of rings is a ring

If $B$ and $C$ are rings given $A$-module structures by morphisms $A \to B$ and $A \to C$, then $B \otimes_{A} C$ has a natural ring structure.

###### _proof sketch:_

Define the ring structure on $B \otimes_{A} C$ by $(b_{1} \otimes c_{1}) (b_{2} \otimes c_{2}) = (b_{1} b_{2} ) \otimes (c_{1} c_{2})$. Later, we will see this is an example of a fibred product.

---

Tensoring plays nicely with (arbitrary) direct sums and thus, finite products. Specifically, by universal property, tensoring and direct sums commute.

##### _proposition:_ tensoring commutes with direct sums

If $M$ and $\{ N_{i} \}_{i \in \mathscr{I}}$ are all $A$-modules, then there is a natural isomorphism giving
$$
M \otimes_{A} \left( \bigoplus_{i \in \mathscr{I}} N_{i} \right) \cong \bigoplus_{i \in \mathscr{I}} M \otimes_{A} N_{i}.
$$

###### _proof:_

We will show that $\bigoplus_{i \in \mathscr{I}} M \otimes N_{i}$ satisfies the universal property of the tensor product $M \otimes \left( \bigoplus_{i \in \mathscr{I}} N_{i} \right)$. Specifically, we claim any bilinear map $\beta : M \times (\bigoplus_{i \in \mathscr{I}} N_{i}) \to N$ factors uniquely as $\psi \circ t$ where $t : M \times (\bigoplus_{i \in \mathscr{I}} N_{i}) \to \bigoplus_{i \in \mathscr{I}} M \otimes N_{i}$ is given by
$$
t : (m, n_{i_{1}} \oplus \dots \oplus n_{i_{k}}) \mapsto m \otimes n_{i_{1}} \oplus \dots \oplus m \otimes n_{i_{k}}
$$
and $\psi$ is a morphism of $A$-modules.

Notice $\beta$ factors as above with $\psi$ as defined below.
$$
\psi(m \otimes n_{i}) = \beta(m, n_{i})
$$
This is a well-defined map ($A$-linear map) on each $M \otimes N_{i}$ by the bilinearity of $\beta$. Thus, it is well-defined on their direct sum. Suppose $\beta = \psi' \circ t$ for some $A$-module morphism. But then
$$
\psi'(m \otimes n_{i}) = \psi'(t(m, n_{i})) = \beta(m, n_{i})
$$
and so $\psi' = \psi$. That is, $\psi$ is unique.

---

##### _example:_ the tensor product of (finitely generated) free modules

For non-negative integers $m, n$ we can write
$$
A^{\oplus n} \otimes A^{\oplus m} \cong \bigoplus_{i = 1}^n A \otimes A^{\oplus m} \cong \bigoplus_{i = 1}^n A^{\oplus m} \cong A^{\oplus m n}.
$$

---

Tensoring also plays nicely with [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Localisation, categorically#Localisation of modules|localisation]] —

##### _proposition:_ localisation of a module is the tensor product with localisation

If $S$ is a multiplicative subset of $A$ and $M$ is an $A$-module, there is a natural isomorphism (each, as $S^{-1} A$-modules and as $A$-modules) giving
$$
S^{-1} A \otimes_{A} M \cong S^{-1} M.
$$

###### _proof:_

We show that for a multiplicative $S \subseteq A$  $S^{-1} A \otimes_{A} M$ satisfies [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Localisation, categorically#_construction _ localisation of a module|the universal property of the localisation of a module]] $S^{-1} M$. Specifically, we claim that if $N$ is an $A$-module with morphism $\varphi : M \to N$ such that the action of $S$ is invertible on $N$, then $\varphi$ factors uniquely as $\psi \circ \alpha$ where $\alpha : M \to S^{-1} A \otimes_{A} M$ is given by $m \mapsto 1 \otimes m$.

One example of $\psi$ so that $\varphi$ factors appropriately is given by
$$
\psi(a / s \otimes m) = a s^{-1} \varphi(m)
$$
where $s ^{-1}$ is the inverse map to $N \to N$ by $n \mapsto s n$. Suppose $\varphi$ factors as $\psi' \circ \alpha$. Then, for all $m \in M$ we have $\psi'(1 \otimes m) = \varphi(m)$ and so
$$
\begin{align}
\psi'(a / s \otimes m) & = s ^{-1} (s \psi'(a / s \otimes m))  \\
 & = s ^{-1} (\psi'(1 \otimes am))  \\
 & = s ^{-1} \varphi(am)  \\
 & = a s ^{-1} \varphi(m) \\
 & = \psi(a / s \otimes m).
\end{align}
$$
Thus, $\psi' = \psi$ so $\psi$ is the unique such morphism. Further, by definition, $\psi$ is both $A$-and $S^{-1} A$-linear.

---

##### _example:_ computing tensors with localisation

Consider $\mathbb{Z} / (2) \otimes_{\mathbb{Z}} \mathbb{Q}$. Since tensors commute with localisation and we can think of $\mathbb{Q}$ as $\mathbb{Z}_{(0)}$, we have $\mathbb{Z} / (2) \otimes_{\mathbb{Z}} \mathbb{Q} \cong (\mathbb{Z} / (2)))_{((0))}$ where we are thinking of the localisation as a $\mathbb{Z}$ (away from the prime $(0) \subseteq \mathbb{Z}$, not away from $(0) \subseteq \mathbb{Z} / (2)$). Since $\mathbb{Z} / (2)$ is annihilated by $2 \in \mathbb{Z} \setminus (0)$, we have $(\mathbb{Z} / (2))_{(0)} = 0$.

---

### Non-commutative tensor products

We can also construct the tensor products in the case of a non-commutative ring $A$. This is a functor $\mathsf{RMod}_{A} \times \mathsf{LMod}_{A} \to \mathsf{Ab}$. The idea is that we already have a tensor product of abelian groups (just tensor over $\mathbb{Z}$). WE then just take a quotient by left versus right scaling by $A$.

##### _definition:_ non-commutative tensor products

Suppose $N$ is a right $A$-module and $M$ is a left $A$-module. The **non-commutative tensor product** of $N$ and $M$ is $N \otimes_{R} M$, the (unique) abelian group making the following sequence of abelian groups [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Complexes and exactness#_definition _ complexes, exactness, short exact sequence|exact]].
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsfonts}
\begin{document}
	\begin{tikzcd}
		N \otimes_{\mathbb{Z}} R \otimes_{\mathbb{Z}} M \ar[rr, "\mathrm{id} \otimes \mu - \nu \otimes \mathrm{id}"] && N \otimes_{\mathbb{Z}} M \ar[r] & N \otimes_{R} M \ar[r] & 0
	\end{tikzcd}
\end{document}
```
Here $\mu : R \otimes_{Z} M \to M$ and $\nu : N \otimes_{Z} R \to N$ are the multiplication maps.

> [!warning]
> the universal property below might not be right

It satisfies the universal product that any $R$-linear $N \otimes_{\mathbb{Z}} M \to C$ factors uniquely through $N \otimes_{R} M$.

---