---
tags:
- rising-sea/1/2
- comm-alg
- alg
- cat-th
---

Let $A$ be a (commutative, unital) [[Abstract algebra --- math-171/notes/Rings#What's a ring?|ring]].

Tensor products (like localisation) are an algebraic construction that can be made clearer with a definition by universal property. The tensor product (over $A$) of $A$-modules $M$ and $N$ is usually defined as consisting of all $A$-linear combinations of symbols $m \otimes n$ (with $m \in M$ and $n \in N$) under the equivalence relations that $\otimes$ distributes over addition in both, $M$ and $N$ and $a$. Formally, we could define

##### _definition:_ tensor product

The tensor product (over $A$) of $A$-modules $M$ and $N$ is
$$
M \otimes_{A} N = F_{A}(M \times N) / U
$$
Here $U$ is the submodule generated by
$$
\{ (m_{1} + m_{2}, n_{1} + n_{2}) - (m_{1}, n_{1}) - (m_{1}, n_{2}) - (m_{2}, n_{1}) - (m_{2}, n_{2}) \} \cup \{ (am, n) - a(m, n) \} \cup \{ (m, an) - a(m, n) \}
$$
$F_{A}(M \times N)$ is the free $A$-module over the (set-theoretic) product $M \times N$.

We write $m \otimes n$ for the equivalence class of $(m, n)$.

Note that when $A$ is clear, we omit it in the subscript, writing $M \otimes N$. Also note that clearly $M \otimes N \cong N \otimes M$. Finally, note that since $M \otimes_{A} N$ is a quotient of the free $A$-module over $M \times N$, to define an $A$-module homomorphism from the tensor product, it suffices to define the value it takes on each $m \otimes n$ and verify that each generator of $U$ is sent to zero.

##### _example:_ tensor product of quotient rings

Say for concreteness we want to understand the tensor product $\mathbb{Z} / 10 \mathbb{Z} \otimes_{\mathbb{Z}} \mathbb{Z} / 12 \mathbb{Z}$. We claim that $\mathbb{Z} / 10 \mathbb{Z} \otimes_{\mathbb{Z}} \mathbb{Z} / 12 \mathbb{Z} \cong \mathbb{Z} / 2 \mathbb{Z}$.

Consider any $m \otimes n$ in the tensor product. Since the elements of the $\mathbb{Z}$-modules are also elements of $\mathbb{Z}$, we have $m \otimes n = mn (1 \otimes 1)$. Consider the $\mathbb{Z}$-module map (or equivalently, group homomorphism) $\mathbb{Z} \to \mathbb{Z} / 10 \mathbb{Z} \otimes \mathbb{Z} / 12 \mathbb{Z}$ by $n \mapsto n(1 \otimes 1)$. Since
$$
\begin{align}
2n(1 \otimes 1) & = (12 n - 10n)(1 \otimes 1) \\
 & = n(12 \otimes 1) - n(1 \otimes 10) \\
 & = 0n - 0n \\
 & = 0
\end{align}
$$
(and $1(1 \otimes 1) \neq 0$) in the tensor product, it has kernel $2 \mathbb{Z}$.

In general, we have $\mathbb{Z} / (m) \otimes_{\mathbb{Z}} \mathbb{Z} / (n) \cong \mathbb{Z} / (m, n)$ and in fact, $A / \mathfrak{i} \otimes_{A} A / \mathfrak{j} \cong A / (\mathfrak i + \mathfrak j)$ for the same reason.

While it is sort of clear why we may want to consider the tensor product (a priori, and from this definition), the definition doesn't do the best job at this. A better definition shows that $M \otimes N$ satisfies a universal property.

##### _proposition:_ the universal property of tensor products

Given $A$-modules $M$ and $N$, the tensor product is the unique $A$-module $M \otimes_{A} N$ with a bilinear map $t : M \times N \to M \otimes_{A} N$ such that every bilinear map from the ($\mathsf{Mod}_{A}$) [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Universal properties and why categories?#_construction _ products|product]] $M \times N \to V$ factors as the composition of $t$ and a unique linear map $M \otimes_{A} N \to V$.

That is, it is [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Universal properties and why categories?#_example _ initial and final objects in specific categories|initial]] among (modules with) bilinear maps from $M \times N$.

###### _proof:_

First we show that this universal property defines the tensor product up to unique isomorphism. Suppose $T'$ with bilinear map $t' : M \times N \to T'$ also satisfies the universal property of the tensor product. Thus, the bilinear map $t : M \times N \to M \otimes N$ factors uniquely as $M \times N \to T' \to M \otimes N$ and $t' : M \times N \to T$ factors as $M \times N \to M \otimes N \to T'$. 

If we write $\tau'$ for  $T' \to M \otimes N$ and $\tau$ for $M \otimes N \to T'$, then we get $\tau' \circ \tau : M \otimes N \to M \otimes N$ and we claim $t : M \times N \to M \otimes N$ factors through it. This follows since the diagram
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsfonts}
\begin{document}
	\begin{tikzcd}
		M \times N \ar[r, "t"] \ar[d, "t"] \ar[rd, "t'"] & M \otimes N \ar[d, "\tau"] \\
		M \otimes N & T' \ar[l, "\tau'"]
	\end{tikzcd}
\end{document}
```
commutes. Specifically, we already know $t'$ factors as $\tau \circ t$ and $t$ factors as $\tau' \circ t'$ so $t$ factors as $\tau' \circ \tau \circ t$. However, $t$ already factors through $\operatorname{id} : M \otimes N \to M \otimes N$, so $\tau' \circ \tau = \operatorname{id}_{M \otimes N}$. Similarly, $\tau \circ \tau' = \operatorname{id}_{T'}$ and thus, they are (unique) inverse isomorphisms. 

Now we show that our definition of $M \otimes N$ actually satisfies the universal property. Note that the natural map $t : M \times N \to M \otimes N$ by $(m, n) \mapsto m \otimes n$ is bilinear. Suppose $\varphi : M \times N \to V$ is bilinear. Then we claim the map $\tau : M \otimes N \to V$ by $m \otimes n \mapsto \varphi(m, n)$ is well-defined and linear. This follows easily by checking that it is well-defined as a map on $F_{A}(M \times N)$ and that its kernel includes $U$ such that $F_{A}(M \times N) / U \cong M \otimes N$. That in turn follows directly from the fact that $\tau$ is bilinear. Clearly, $\varphi = \tau \circ t$, so we are done.

### Tensoring is nice

Tensoring is quite a nice operation, commuting with lots of natural constructions.

For one it is functorial and preserves (right) exact sequences. We will later define the notion of a right-exact functor in appropriate generality, but here it can be understood in the classical sense of exactness.

##### _proposition:_ tensoring is functorial and right-exact

The map of objects $\mathsf{Mod}_{A} \to \mathsf{Mod}_{A}$ by $M \mapsto M \otimes N$ naturally extends to a covariant [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Functors and natural transformations#_definition _ (covariant, contravariant) functors|functor]]. Further, this functor is right-exact — if
$$
M_{1} \to M_{2} \to M_{3} \to 0
$$
is [[Abstract algebra --- math-171/notes/Exact sequences#_definition _ exact sequence|exact]], then
$$
M_{1} \otimes N \to M_{2} \otimes N \to M_{3} \otimes N \to 0
$$
is exact.

###### _proof:_

We claim that $F : \mathsf{Mod}_{A} \to \mathsf{Mod}_{A}$ defined on objects by $M \mapsto M \otimes N$ and on homomorphisms $\varphi : M_{1} \to M_{2}$ by $\varphi \mapsto \varphi_{*}$ where $\varphi_{*}(m \otimes n) = \varphi(m) \otimes n$ is a functor. To do this requires showing that $\varphi_{*}$ is a well-defined $A$-module homomorphism $M_{1} \otimes N \to M_{2} \otimes N$, $\operatorname{id}_{M, *} = \operatorname{id}_{M \otimes N}$ and $(\psi \circ \varphi)_{*} = \psi_{*} \circ \varphi_{*}$ (for some second map $\psi : M_{2} \to M_{3}$).

$\varphi_{*}$ is clearly a well-defined linear map on $F_{A}(M \times N)$ since it is defined by its values on the basis of $F_{A}(M \times N)$. It's easy to show that it vanishes on $U$ such that $F_{A}(M \times N) / U \cong M \otimes N$ —
$$
\varphi_{*}(a m \otimes n) = \varphi(am) \otimes n = a(\varphi(m) \otimes n) = \varphi(m) \otimes an = \varphi_{*}(m \otimes an)
$$
and
$$
\varphi_{*}((m_{1} + m_{2}) \otimes n) = \varphi_{}(m_{1} + m_{2}) \otimes n = \varphi(m_{1}) \otimes n + \varphi(m_{2}) \otimes n = \varphi_{*}(m_{1} \otimes n + m_{2} \otimes n).
$$
(the symmetric result in the second factor follows similarly).

It's clear that, for each $m \otimes n \in M \otimes N$ we have $\operatorname{id}_{M, *} = \operatorname{id}_{M \otimes N}$ on every basis vector, and thus, they are equal as maps —
$$
\operatorname{id}_{M, *}(m \otimes n) = \operatorname{id}_{M}(m) \otimes n = m \otimes n = \operatorname{id}_{M \otimes N}(m \otimes n).
$$
Similarly, $(\psi \circ \varphi)_{*} = \psi_{*} \circ \varphi_{*}$ on every basis vector, and thus, as maps —
$$
(\psi \circ \varphi)_{*}(m \otimes n) = \psi \circ \varphi(m) \otimes n = \psi_{*}(\varphi(m) \otimes n) = \psi_{*} \circ \varphi_{*}(m \otimes n).
$$

Now we show $M \mapsto M \otimes N$ is right exact. If
$$
M_{1} \to M_{2} \to M_{3} \to 0
$$
is exact with maps $\varphi_{i} : M_{i} \to M_{i + 1}$, then $\varphi_{2} : M_{2} \to M_{3}$ is surjective and $\operatorname{img} \varphi_{1} = \ker \varphi_{2}$. We want to show the same for $\varphi_{i, *}$. Note that $\varphi_{2, *} : M_{2} \otimes N \to M_{3} \otimes N$ is surjective on basis elements — for any $m_{3} \otimes n$ with $\varphi_{2}(m_{2}) = m_{3}$, we have $\varphi_{2, *}(m_{2} \otimes n) = m_{3} \otimes n$. Thus, $\varphi_{2, *}$ is surjective. If $m_{2} \otimes n \in \operatorname{ker} \varphi_{2, *}$ we must have $\varphi_{2}(m_{2}) \otimes n = 0$. If $n = 0$, then $m_{2} \otimes n = 0 \in \operatorname{img} \varphi_{1, *}$. If $n \neq 0$, then $\varphi_{2}(m_{2}) = 0$, and thus, $m_{2}  \in \operatorname{img} \varphi_{1}$. It follows that $m_{2} \otimes n = \varphi_{1, *}(m_{1} \otimes n) \in \operatorname{img} \varphi_{1, *}$. 
 
We've seen already that tensoring with a ring on the left can look like allowing scalars in the "left" module. We can formalise this intuition.

##### _proposition:_ tensoring with a ring is a base-ring change functor

If $M$ is an $A$-module and $B$ is a ring, given an $A$-module structure by a morphism $A \to B$, then $B \otimes_{A} M$ is also a $B$-module. Further, the map $M \mapsto B \otimes_{A} M$ extends to a functor $\mathsf{Mod}_{A} \to \mathsf{Mod}_{B}$.

###### _proof sketch:_

Define the $B$-module structure on $B \otimes_{A} M$ by $b_{1}(b_{2} \otimes m) = (b_{1} b_{2}) \otimes m$. Further, for $\varphi : M \to N$ as $A$-modules, define $\varphi_{*} : B \otimes_{A} M \to B \otimes_{A} N$ by $\varphi_{*}(b \otimes m) = b \otimes \varphi(m)$. Clearly, $(\psi \circ \varphi)_{*} = \psi_{*} \circ \varphi_{*}$.

In fact, this turns the tensor product of two rings into a ring in its own right.

##### _proposition:_ tensor product of rings is a ring

If $B$ and $C$ are rings given $A$-module structures by morphisms $A \to B$ and $A \to C$, then $B \otimes_{A} C$ has a natural ring structure.

###### _proof sketch:_

Define the ring structure on $B \otimes_{A} C$ by $(b_{1} \otimes c_{1}) (b_{2} \otimes c_{2}) = (b_{1} b_{2} ) \otimes (c_{1} c_{2})$. Later, we will see this is an example of a fibred product.

Tensoring plays nicely with (arbitrary) direct sums and thus, finite products. Specifically, by universal property, tensoring and direct sums commute.

##### _proposition:_ tensoring commutes with direct sums

If $M$ and $\{ N_{i} \}_{i \in \mathscr{I}}$ are all $A$-modules, then there is a natural isomorphism giving
$$
M \otimes \left( \bigoplus_{i \in \mathscr{I}} N_{i} \right) \cong \bigoplus_{i \in \mathscr{I}} (M \otimes N_{i}).
$$

Tensoring also plays nicely with [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Localisation, categorically#Localisation of modules|localisation]] —

##### _proposition:_ localisation of a module is the tensor product with localisation

If $S$ is a multiplicative subset of $A$ and $M$ is an $A$-module, there is a natural isomorphism (each, as $S^{-1} A$-modules and as $A$-modules) giving
$$
S^{-1} A \otimes_{A} M \cong S^{-1} M.
$$