---
tags:
  - alg
  - math-171/17
  - math-171/18
---

[[Abstract Algebra I --- math-171/notes/Rings#Substructures of rings|Last class]] we defined substructures of rings — subrings and ideals. Today we use these. First, some more definitions.

### Definitions and examples

##### _definition:_ (left and right) ideals

Let $R$ be a ring. A nonempty subset $I \subset R$ is a left ideal or a right provided
1) $I$ is a subring of $R$
2) $ri \in I$ if $i \in I$ for left ideals 
or, respectively
2) $ir \in I$ if $i \in I$ for right ideals. 

##### _definition:_ two-sided ideal

A two-sided ideal is both a left and right ideal.

##### _definition:_ ideal

If $R$ is a commutative ring, the left ideals are exactly the right ideals, and thus, they are all just called ideals.

Sometimes even when $R$ is not commutative, we refer to two-sided ideals as just ideals.

In essence an ideal is an "$R$-vector space".

##### _examples:_ ideals

1) $3 \mathbb{Z}$ (the multiples of $3$) is an ideal in $\mathbb{Z}$.
2) Any ideal of $\mathbb{Q}$ is just $\mathbb{Q}$ (or the trivial ring). This is true for any division ring (?). Definitely for any field.
3) We can think of "the ideal generated by". This is just the smallest ideal containing the things it is generated by (we will make this precise). The right ideal generated by $\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 1 \\ 0 & 0\end{bmatrix}$ in $\mathcal{M}_{2}(\mathbb{R})$ is $\left \{ \begin{bmatrix} x & y \\ 0 & 0 \end{bmatrix} \mid x, y \in \mathbb{R} \right  \}$. The left ideal is $\left \{ \begin{bmatrix} x & x \\ y & y \end{bmatrix} \mid x, y \in \mathbb{R} \right \}$.

##### _non-example:_ ideal

The polynomials with nonzero constant coefficient in $\mathbb{R}[x]$ do not form an ideal — they are not even a subring.

### Generating ideals

Here we make the thing that we said we would make precise precise.

##### _definition:_ $(A)$, $RA$, $AR$

Let $A$ be a subset of a ring $R$.

$(A)$ is the smallest ideal of $R$ that contains $A$.

The left ideal generated by $A$ is
$$
RA = \left\{  \sum_{i = 1}^n r_{i} a_{i} \mid r_{i} \in R, a_{i} \in A, n \in \mathbb{N}  \right\}
$$

The right ideal generated by $A$ is
$$
AR = \left\{  \sum_{i = 1}^n a_{i} r_{i} \mid r_{i} \in R, a_{i} \in A, n \in \mathbb{N}  \right\}
$$

Note that
$$
(A) = \bigcap_{\text{ideals } I, A \subset I} I.
$$

##### _abuse of notation:_ $(a_{1}, \dots, a_{n})$

Sometimes, for $A = \{ a_{1}, \dots, a_{n} \}$ we write $(A) = (a_{1}, \dots, a_{n})$.

##### _definition:_ principal ideal

An ideal $I \subset R$ is principal if $I = (a)$.

##### _example:_ every ideal in $\mathbb{Z}$ is principal

Every ideal in $\mathbb{Z}$ is of the form $n\mathbb{Z}$.

### Ideals tell you about the ring

We can use ideals to know things about the rings that they are embedded in.

##### _proposition:_ when rings are fields

For any ideal $I \subset R$ (where $R$ is a ring with identity)
1) $I = R$ if and only if $I$ contains a [[Abstract Algebra I --- math-171/notes/Rings#_definition _ unit|unit]].
2) If $R$ is commutative, then $R$ is a field if and only if the only ideals of $R$ are the trivial ring and $R$.

###### _proof:_

1) Suppose $I$ contains a unit $u$. Then for every $r \in R$ we must have $r u^{-1} u \in I$ and thus, $r \in I$. That is $I$ contains every element of $R$, and thus is just $R$.
	If $I = R$ then it has to contain the unit $1$ (or just any unit $u \in R$).
2) Suppose $R$ is commutative and only has $0$ and $R$ as ideals. Then $(r) = R$ for any nonzero $r \in R$. Thus $1 \in (r)$, and thus, there exists some $x \in R$ such that $xr = rx = 1$. Note that we need commutativity for $x$ to be a two-sided inverse. That is, any nonzero $r \in R$ is a unit, and thus $R$ is a field.
	Suppose $R$ is a field. Then every ideal that contains a nonzero element must contain a unit and thus is just $R$. The only other ideal is $(0) = \{ 0 \}$, the trivial ring.

##### _corollary:_ fields map out injectively

If $R$ is a field, then any nontrivial ring homomorphism from $R$ is injective.

###### _proof:_

Note that ring homomorphisms are injective if and only if they have trivial kernel. This follows by treating ring homomorphisms as homomorphisms between their additive groups.

Let $\varphi : R \to S$ be a homomorphism. Then $\ker \varphi$ is an ideal in $R$. But since $R$ is a field $\ker \varphi = 0$ or $\ker \varphi = R$. That is, $\varphi$ is injective, or $\varphi$ is trivial, respectively.

### Quotient rings

Since ideals include everything you could multiply an element by, we only really need to quotient out by the additive group to get a quotient ring. Basically, an ideal is the equivalent of a [[Normal subgroups|normal subgroup]] for a ring.

##### _proposition, definition:_ quotient rings are rings

For any ring $R$ with an ideal $I \subset R$. The (additive) quotient group $(R, +)/I$ is a ring under the binary operations
$$
\begin{split}
(r + I) + (s + I) & = (r + s) + I \\
(r + I)(s + I) & = (rs) + I.
\end{split}
$$

This ring is called the quotient ring $R/I$.

###### _proof:_

Since $(R, +)$ is abelian, and $(I, +)$ is clearly a subgroup, the addition is clearly well-defined and forms an abelian group as necessary for a ring. We need to show that the multiplication is well-defined and behaves as desired. We will use things we know about [[Normal subgroups#Quotient groups|quotient groups]] to prove the multiplication part.

Suppose $r + I = r' + I$ and $s + I = s' + I$. Then $r = r' + i$ and $s = s' + j$ for some $i, j \in R$. Then
$$
\begin{split}
	(r + I)(s + I) & = ((r' + i) + I) ((s' + j) + I) \\
 & = (r's' + i s ' + r' j + ij) + I \\
 & = (r' s') + I. \\
\end{split}
$$
where the last step follows because $is' \in I$ by left absorption, $r'j \in I$ by right absorption and $ij \in I$ because it's a subring.

Notice then, that just like with normal subgroups of groups, every ideal $I \subset R$ is the kernel of the natural projection
$$
\begin{split}
\pi \colon & R \to R/I \\
& r \mapsto r + I.
\end{split}
$$