---
tags:
- math-199DR
- uc-2026/enum-geo/1
- cx-geo
- alg-geo
- alg-top
- sidhant-raman
---

In the study of Riemann surfaces, complex projective space plays an important role. We will define it as a complex manifold so that we can know what holomorphic maps to it are.

##### _definition:_ complex projective $n$-space

**Complex projective $n$-space** is the complex manifold $\mathbb{C} \mathbb{P}^n$ parameterising one-dimensional subspaces of $\mathbb{C}^{n + 1}$ and given by $\mathbb{C} \mathbb{P}^n = (\mathbb{C}^{n + 1} \setminus \{ 0 \}) / \mathbb{C}^\times$ with the [[Topology --- math-147/notes/Quotient and identification spaces#_definition _ quotient topology, quotient space, quotient map|quotient topology]]/

Points of $\mathbb{C} \mathbb{P}^n$ are written as $(x_{0} : x_{1} : \dots : x_{n})$ for the orbit of $(x_{0}, \dots, x_{n}) \in \mathbb{C}^{n + 1}$. 

$\mathbb{C}\mathbb{P}^n$ is covered by $n + 1$ open sets $U_{i} = \{ (x_{0} : \dots : x_{n}) \mid x_{i} \neq 0 \}$ with each $U_{i}$ homeomorphic to $\mathbb{C}^n$ by $(x_{0} : x_{1} : \dots : x_{n}) \mapsto (x_{0} / x_{i}, \dots, x_{n} / x_{i})$. They form a complex atlas.

---

Note that we can still cover $\mathbb{C} \mathbb{P}^n$ with the set of just those points with $x_{j} / x_{i} \leq 1$ in $U_{i}$. But then, $\mathbb{C} \mathbb{P}^n$ is covered by $n + 1$ compact discs, and thus, is compact itself.

$\mathbb{C} \mathbb{P}^n$ allows us to understand vanishing sets of homogeneous functions. If $f \in \mathbb{C}[x_{0}, \dots, x_{n}]$ is homogeneous, then it doesn't have well-defined values on $\mathbb{C} \mathbb{P}^n$ but whether it vanishes on $\mathbb{C} \mathbb{P}^n$ or not is well-defined.

Note, we have an inductive cellular decomposition $\mathbb{C} \mathbb{P}^n = \mathbb{C}^n \cup \mathbb{C}^{n - 1} \cup \dots \cup \mathbb{C} \cup \{ \infty \}$. This allows us to compute homology easily.

##### _theorem:_ homology of projective space

The [[UChicago --- uc-2026/notes/Simplicial sets#_definition _ singularisation, singular complex, singular homology|singular homology]] of $\mathbb{C} \mathbb{P}^n$ is
$$
H_{i}(\mathbb{C} \mathbb{P}^n, \mathbb{Z}) = \begin{cases}
\mathbb{Z} & i = 2k \\
0
\end{cases}
$$
where $H_{2k}(\mathbb{C} \mathbb{P}^n, \mathbb{Z})$ is generated by the image of any inclusion $\mathbb{C} \mathbb{P}^k \to \mathbb{C} \mathbb{P}^n$.

---

Dually, we have a generator of cohomology of projective space.

##### _theorem:_ cohomology of projective space

The singular cohomology of $\mathbb{C} \mathbb{P}^n$ is
$$
H^i(\mathbb{C} \mathbb{P}^n, \mathbb{Z}) = \begin{cases}
\mathbb{Z} & i = 2k \\
0
\end{cases}
$$
where $H^{2}(\mathbb{C} \mathbb{P}^n, \mathbb{Z})$ is generated by $\omega_{\text{FS}}$ and $H_{\bullet}(\mathbb{C} \mathbb{P}^n, \mathbb{Z}) = \mathbb{Z}[\omega_{\text{FS}}] / (\omega_{\text{FS}}^{n + 1})$ with $\ deg \omega_{\text{FS}} = 2$.

Here $\omega_{\text{FS}}$ is the $2$-form given by the $\mathbb{C}^*$ invariant form
$$
\omega = \frac{i}{2} \partial \overline{\partial} \log(z \overline{z})
$$
on $\mathbb{C}^{n + 1}$.

$\omega_{\text{FS}}$ is Poincaré dual to the hyperplane $H \subseteq \mathbb{C} \mathbb{P}^n$ and its $k$-fold wedge powers are Poincaré dual to the intersection of $k$ hyperplanes in general position.

---

Note, this gives a Kähler structure to each complex projective manifold/variety holomorphically embedded in $\mathbb{P}^n$. Specifically, if $i : X \to \mathbb{C} \mathbb{P}^n$ is the inclusion, then we have $i^*\omega_{\text{FS}} \in H^{2}(X, \mathbb{Z})$.

##### _definition:_ intersection product on cohomology

We define the **intersection product of cohomology classes** corresponding to subvarieties $Y, Z \subseteq X \subseteq \mathbb{C} \mathbb{P}^n$ as
$$
[Y] [Z] = \sum_{p \in Y \cap Z} (-1)^{\operatorname{sgn}_{Y, Z} p}
$$
where $\operatorname{sgn}_{Y, Z} p$ is $\pm 1$ depending on whether the bases of tangent spaces of $Y$ and $Z$ orient $X$ correctly or not.

---