---
tags:
- lin-alg
- alg
- nt
- alg-top
- pcmi-2021/3
---

Let $\mathbb{F}$ be a field of characteristic not $2$.

We can assemble the information of quadratic spaces, their [[Quadratic forms and K-theory --- pcmi-2021/notes/Direct sums of quadratic spaces|direct sums]], their [[Quadratic forms and K-theory --- pcmi-2021/notes/Tensor products of quadratic spaces|tensor products]], and [[Quadratic forms and K-theory --- pcmi-2021/notes/Hyperbolic quadratic forms#_definition _ the hyperbolic plane|hyperbolic forms]] into algebraic objects — abelian groups and rings. These (abelian) groups and (commutative) rings will have simple objects. This is the first of many instances in number theory where turning a collection of algebraic objects into an algebraic object itself is fruitful.

### The Grothendieck–Witt group and ring

Under direct sums, the set of all (isomorphism classes of) quadratic spaces over $\mathbb{F}$ forms a commutative monoid (an abelian semigroup with identity). The [[Quadratic forms and K-theory --- pcmi-2021/notes/Direct sums of quadratic spaces#Witt cancellation theorem|Witt cancellation theorem]] can be restated as a theorem about this monoid.

##### _theorem:_ Witt cancellation theorem, as a result about monoids

The commutative monoid of quadratic spaces over $\mathbb{F}$ under direct sums is cancellative.

---

Thus, when we [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Adjoint functors#_example _ groupification as adjoint to forgetting|groupify]] or group-complete, we don't lose any information — the unique map 

##### _definition:_ the Grothendieck–Witt group, ring

The **Grothendieck–Witt group** of $\mathbb{F}$ is $GW(\mathbb{F})$, the group completion of the commutative monoid of quadratic spaces over $\mathbb{F}$ under direct sum.

The **Grothendeick–Witt ring** of $\mathbb{F}$ (also denoted $GW(\mathbb{F})$) is the (commutative) [[Abstract algebra --- math-171/notes/Rings#_definition _ commutative ring|ring]] with additive group given by the Grothendieck–Witt group and multiplication given by [[Quadratic forms and K-theory --- pcmi-2021/notes/Tensor products of quadratic spaces#_definition _ tensor product of quadratic spaces|tensor product]].

---

It is implicit in this definition that tensor products are commutative, associative, and [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Tensor products, categorically#_proposition _ tensoring commutes with direct sums|commute with finite direct sums]]. Also note that we have a multiplicative identity $\left< 1 \right>$ (by definition of the tensor product).

The [[Quadratic forms and K-theory --- pcmi-2021/notes/Invariants of quadratic forms#_theorem _ Witt's chain equivalence theorem|Witt's chain equivalence theorem]] then gives a very concrete presentation of this ring.

##### _proposition:_ the presentation of $GW(\mathbb{F})$

The group $GW(\mathbb{F}), +$ is presented by the (additive) [[Geometric group theory --- rtg-2025/notes/Free groups and presentations#_definition _ free group|free abelian group]] $\{ \left< a \right> \mid a \in \mathbb{F}^\times \}$ on $\mathbb{F}^\times$, modulo [[Geometric group theory --- rtg-2025/notes/Free groups and presentations#_definition _ group presentation, generators, relators|relators]] $\left< au^{2} \right> - \left< a \right>$ and $\left< a_{1} \right> + \left< a_{2} \right> - \left< a_{1} + a_{2} \right> -  \left< a_{1} a_{2} / (a_{1} + a_{2}) \right >$.

The multiplication on $GW(\mathbb{F})$ is given by $\left< a \right> \left< b \right> = \left< ab \right>$.

###### _proof:_

Let $F_{\text{ab}}$ denote the free abelian group on $\mathbb{F}^\times$. Then there is a homomorphism $F_{\text{ab}} \to GW(\mathbb{F})$ by $\left< a \right> \mapsto \left< a \right>$, $\left< a \right> + \left< b \right> = \left< a, b \right>$. It is clearly surjective. The fact that its kernel is exactly the subgroup generated by the relations above is [[Quadratic forms and K-theory --- pcmi-2021/notes/Invariants of quadratic forms#Witt's chain equivalence theorem|Witt's chain equivalence theorem]].

The description of multiplication is true for one-dimensional forms by definition, and suffices to describe all multiplication because tensor products commute with direct sums.

---

Our favourite two examples are easy to compute here.

##### _examples:_ Grothendieck–Witt rings of archimedean local fields

$GW(\mathbb{C}) \cong \mathbb{Z}$. The isomorphism is given by "dimension". The same is true for any algebraically or quadratically closed field $\overline{\mathbb{F}}$.

$W(\mathbb{R}) \cong \mathbb{Z}[x] / (x^{2} - 1)$. The isomorphism is given by $\left< 1 \right> \mapsto 1$ and $\left< -1 \right> \mapsto x$.

---

There is always a dimension map $\dim : GW(\mathbb{F}) \to \mathbb{Z}$ by $\left< a \right> \mapsto 1$.

### The Witt ring

The Witt ring ignores the hyperbolic plane.

##### _proposition:_ the ideal generated by the hyperbolic plane

$H = \left< 1 \right> + \left< -1 \right> \in GW(\mathbb{F})$ generates a proper ideal of $GW(\mathbb{F})$, isomorphic to $\mathbb{Z}$ as a subrng ([[Abstract algebra --- math-171/notes/Rings#_definition _ ring with identity, unital rings|ring-without-identity]]).

###### _proof:_ 

$\left< 1 \right> \not\in (H)$ — $H$ is two-dimensional and thus, every element of $(H)$ is even-dimensional. Thus, $(H)$ is proper.

Consider the map of rngs $\mathbb{Z} \to (H)$ by $n \to n H$. It is injective (we never have $H^{\oplus n} \cong 0$ as quadratic spaces). It is also surjective. Since $\left< a \right> \otimes H \cong \left< a, -a \right> \cong H$ [[Quadratic forms and K-theory --- pcmi-2021/attachments/exercises/ex 1/ex 1.pdf#page=3|always]], every element of $(H)$ is a direct sum of $H$s. Thus $\mathbb{Z}$ and $H$ are isomorphic as rngs.

---

##### _definition:_ Witt ring

The **Witt ring** of $\mathbb{F}$ is $W(\mathbb{F}) = GW(\mathbb{F}) / (H)$.

---

It is not difficult to see that the additive group of the Witt ring has only one more relator than the Grothendieck–Witt ring: $\left< a \right> + \left< -a \right>$.

We can think of the Witt ring as representing just the anisotropic part of each quadratic form. In fact all the elements can be thought of this way. We don't have to use additive inverses of negative dimension as in $GW(\mathbb{F})$. Instead, the additive inverse of $V, q$ [[Quadratic forms and K-theory --- pcmi-2021/attachments/exercises/ex 1/ex 1.pdf#page=3|is just]] $V, -q$.

Of course, the reason we defined this is because it will be useful to understand Witt rings of specific fields. Some easy examples that we already understand are the following.

##### _examples:_ Witt rings of archimedean local fields

$W(\mathbb{C}) \cong \mathbb{Z} / 2$. If $V, q$ is even dimensional, it is the direct sum of hyperbolic planes. Else it is the sum of hyperbolic planes and $\left< 1 \right>$. The isomorphism is given by $0 \mapsto 0$ and $\left< 1 \right> \mapsto 1$. The same is true for any algebraically or quadratically closed field $\overline{\mathbb{F}}$.

$W(\mathbb{R}) \cong \mathbb{Z}$. Again, $V, q$ is just $\left< 1 \right>^{\oplus r} \oplus \left< -1 \right>^{\oplus s}$. Thus, splitting off all the hyperbolic planes leaves $\left< 1 \right>^{\oplus r - s}$ or $\left< -1 \right>^{\oplus s- r}$ which are additive inverses. Send $V, q$ to its "signature" $r - s$. This generalises to a signature map $W(\mathbb{F}) \to \mathbb{Z}$ for any ordered field $\mathbb{F}$. In fact, the set of prime ideals $\operatorname{Spec} W(\mathbb{F})$ describes the set of orderings on $\mathbb{F}$.

Alternately, we can obtain this isomorphism by recognising that under the isomorphism $GW(\mathbb{R}) \cong \mathbb{Z}[x] / (1 - x^{2})$ we should identify $H$ with $1 + x$, and thus, $W(\mathbb{R}) = \mathbb{Z}[x] / (1 + x) \cong \mathbb{Z}$.

---

The dimension map on the Grothendieck–Witt ring descends to a dimension map $\dim : W(\mathbb{F}) \to \mathbb{Z} / (2)$. It is only defined on the target $\mathbb{Z} / (2)$ because in the worst case (when $\mathbb{F}$ is quadratically closed) the hyperbolic ideal contains all the two-dimensional forms.

We will see that in fact, all the torsion in the Witt ring is $2$-power torsion.