---
tags:
- lin-alg
- alg
- pcmi-2021/1
---

Let $V, q$ be a (finite-dimensional) [[Quadratic forms and K-theory --- pcmi-2021/notes/Quadratic forms#_definition _ (non-degenerate, symmetric) bilinear forms, quadratic forms, quadratic spaces, homomorphisms of quadratic spaces, quadratic linear map|quadratic vector space]] over $\mathbb{F}$, a field of characteristic not $2$.

### Orthogonality

Just as for inner products over $\mathbb{R}$ and $\mathbb{C}$, we have a notion of orthogonality for quadratic spaces. It is exactly the same notion.

##### _definition:_ orthogonal, orthogonal complement

Two vectors in $V, q$ are **orthogonal** if $\beta(v, w) = 0$.

For a vector subspace $U \subseteq V$ its **orthogonal complement** is the set of all vectors orthogonal to $U$.
$$
U^\perp = \{ v \in V \mid \beta(u, v) = 0 \text{ for each } u \in U \}.
$$

---

Some of the results that are true for orthogonality over inner product spaces are true over quadratic spaces as well.

##### _proposition:_ dimension of the orthogonal complement

Suppose $U \subseteq V$ is a vector subspace. Then $\dim U + \dim U^\perp = \dim V$.

###### _proof sketch:_

Let $\varphi : V \to V^{\vee}$ be the isomorphism by $v \mapsto \beta(-, v)$. Then $U^\perp$ is the pre-image of $U^0$ the annihilator of $U$. Since $\varphi$ is an isomorphism, $\dim U^\perp = \dim U^0 = \dim V - \dim U$. 

---

Note that [[Linear algebra done right --- ladr/notes/Orthogonal complements and projections|unlike for inner products over]] $\mathbb{R}$ and $\mathbb{C}$, we do not have $V = U \oplus U^\perp$. It is true if and only if the quadratic form restricts to a quadratic form over $U$. This also means we don't automatically have $(U^\perp)^\perp = U$.

##### _proposition:_ direct sum decomposition of quadratic spaces

For any vector subspace $U \subseteq V$, $V = U \oplus U^\perp$ if and only if $q$ restricts to a quadratic form on $U$.

###### _proof:_

Let $\beta$ be the quasi-inner product induced by $q$.

Suppose $V = U \oplus U^\perp$. For each $u \in U$, there exists some $v \in V$ such that $\beta(u, v) \neq 0$. Let $v = v_{U} + v_{U^\perp}$ be the direct sum decomposition of $v$. Since $\beta(u, v_{U^\perp}) = 0$, we have $\beta(u, v_{U}) \neq 0$.

Suppose $q$ restricts to a quadratic form on $U$. Then $U \cap U^\perp = 0$ and their sum is a direct sum. Since 
$$
\dim(U \oplus U^\perp) = \dim U + \dim U^\perp - \dim(U \cap U^\perp) = \dim V
$$
we are done.

---

Note, this generalises to the definition of the [[Quadratic forms and K-theory --- pcmi-2021/notes/Direct sums of quadratic spaces#_definition _ direct sum of quadratic spaces|(external) direct sum of quadratic spaces]].

### The orthogonal group

The orthogonal group is the group of symmetries of the quadratic space.

##### _definition:_ orthogonal group of a quadratic space

The orthogonal group of $V, q$, denoted $\mathrm{O}(V, q)$ is the group of quadratic linear isomorphisms of $V$.

---

There is a particular nice subgroup of the orthogonal group. For every $v \in V$, we can reflect across $\operatorname{span} v$.

##### _definition:_ reflections

Suppose $u \in V$ has $q(u) \neq 0$. The **reflection through $u$** is the quadratic linear isomorphism $R_{u} : V \to V$ given by
$$
R_{u}v = v - \frac{2 \beta(u, v)}{q(u)} u.
$$

---

We will find the following lemma very useful.

##### _lemma:_ reflections act transitively on spheres

For any $v, w \in V$ with $q(v) = q(w)$, there is a reflection $R_{u}$ such that either $R_{u} v = w$ or $R_{u}v = -w$.

###### _proof:_
is in [[Quadratic forms and K-theory --- pcmi-2021/attachments/exercises/ex 1/ex 1.pdf|the exercises]].

---

Note that with this definition, the "mirror" for the reflection is the hyperplane orthogonal to $u$. Geometrically, $R_{u} v$ is $v$ with the component of $v$ orthogonal to the mirror/along $u$ negated.

##### _theorem:_ Cartan–Dieudonné

$\mathrm{O}(V, q)$ is generated by (at most $\dim V$) reflections.

---