---
tags:
- nt
- math-55A/2
---


Learn how to draw $\bb{Z}$! Draw a $7$ and then vertically invert it and draw it again.

##### _theorem:_ the division algorithm

For any integers $a$ and $b$, when we divide $a$ by $b$ we get a unique quotient and remainder. That is, there exist unique integers $q, r$ such that
$$
a = bq + r
$$
where
$$
0 \le r < b.
$$

###### _proof sketch:_

$a$ has to live between some $qb$ and $(q + 1)b$.

##### _definition:_ divides, $\mid$

We say $b$ divides $a$, notated $b \mid a$, for integers $a, b$ if there is an integer $q$ such that $a = bq$.

##### _proposition:_ division is transitive

If $c \mid b$ and $b \mid a$, then $c \mid a$.

###### _proof:_

Since $c \mid b$, $b = c q_1$ and $b \mid a$ gives us $a = b q_2$ which gives us $a = c q_1 q_2$, and thus $c \mid a$.

##### _theorem:_ integer combination theorem

If $d \mid a$ and $d \mid b$, then $d \mid ax + by$ for any $x, y \in \bb{Z}$.

###### _proof:_

Since $d$ divides $a$ and $b$ we must have $q_1 d = a$ and $q_2 d = b$. 

Thus,
$$
ax + by = d(q_1 x + q_2 y)
$$
giving us $d \mid ax + by$ as desired.


### Greatest common divisors

##### _definition:_ greatest common divisor, $\gcd$ 

For any two integers $a$ and $b$, we say that is the greatest natural number $d$ such that $d \mid a$ and $d \mid b$. We write $\gcd(a, b) = d$.

Note that this well defined since the set of "common divisors" of $a$ and $b$ is nonempty ($1$ divides all natural numbers), and is bounded since no common divisor of $a$ and $b$ can be greater than $\min(\abs{a}, \abs{b})$.

##### _definition:_ relatively prime

We say two integers $a$ and $b$ are relatively prime if $\gcd(a, b) = 1$

##### _notation:_ $(a, b)$

Sometimes we're lazy and so we write $(a, b)$ for $\gcd(a, b)$.

This is because the ideal generated by $a$ and $b$ is the ideal generated by $\gcd(a, b)$ (in the integers and particularly nice rings).

##### _lemma:_ small numbers divide big numbers

For positive integers $d$ and $a$, if $d|a$, then $d \le a$.

###### _proof:_

Suppose $d|a$ for $d, a \in \bb{N}$. Then $d = qa$ for some $q \ge 1$. Thus, $d \ge 1 \times a = a$.

##### _theorem:_ Bezout's theorem

For integers $a, b$, $\gcd{(a, b)}$ is an integer combination of $a$ and $b$. That is, there exist $x, y \in \bb{Z}$ such that $ax + by = \gcd{(a, b)}$. Specifically, $\gcd{(a, b)}$ is the least such positive integer combination.

###### _proof:_

Let $g = \gcd{(a, b)}$. Let $l = a x_0 + b y_0$, the smallest positive integer combination of $a$ and $b$.

Note that $g|l$ since $g|a$ and $g|b$. Thus, $g \le l$.

Note that we must have $l|a$ and $l|b$ since if we didn't we would have the following contradiction. If $l$ doesn't divide $a$ (without loss of generality). Then by the division algorithm we get
$$
a = lq + r
$$
with $0 < r < l$.

But then $r = a - lq = a - q(a x_0 - b y_0) = a(1 - q x_0) + b (q y_0)$ which is just an integer combination of $a$ and $b$. Then we have a positive integer combination of $a$ and $b$ less than $l$ which is a contradiction!

Thus, $l$ must divide both $a$ and $b$, and then, by the definition of $\gcd$, $l \le g$.

Thus, $l = g$.

##### _corollary:_ relative prime numbers have unit linear combinations

Integers $a$ and $b$ are relatively prime if and only if there exist $x, y \in \bb{Z}$ such that $ax + by = 1$.

We know lots of theorems about divisibility, and $\gcd$s but what about actual computing them? We need one more theorem.

### Euclid's algorithm

##### _theorem:_ Euclid's theorem

$$
\gcd(a, b) = \gcd(b, a - bx)
$$
for any $x \in \bb{Z}$.

###### _proof sketch:_

The pairs $a, b$ and $b, a - bx$ have all the same common divisors (use the [[Superdiscrete --- math-55A/notes/Division and Euclid's algorithm#_theorem _ integer combination theorem|integer combination theorem]]).

This theorem has some important corollaries.

##### _corollary:_ Euclid's algorithm works

For $a, b$ with $a = bq + r$ with $q, r$ the quotient and remainder given by [[Superdiscrete --- math-55A/notes/Division and Euclid's algorithm#_theorem _ the division algorithm|the division algorithm]], $\gcd{(a, b)} = \gcd{(b, a - bq)} = \gcd{(b, r)}$.

##### _algorithm:_ Euclid's algorithm

For $a, b$, if $b \mid a$ we are done. 
If not compute $\gcd(b, r)$ recursively, where $r$ is the remainder given by dividing $a$ by $b$.

Note that Euclid's algorithm is ridiculously fast - at worst $5d$ steps for a $d$ digit number $b$. It's worst case is usually adjacent Fibonacci numbers (because at each step the difference is as large as possible).

Also, note that Euclid's algorithm gives us a construction for [[Superdiscrete --- math-55A/notes/Division and Euclid's algorithm#_theorem _ Bezout's theorem|Bezout's theorem]].

##### _example:_ the least integer combination of $847$ and $203$

We can compute $\gcd(847, 203)$ by Euclid's algorithm. Let $a = 847$ and $b = 203$.
$$
\begin{gathered}
	847 = 4 \times 203 + 35 \implies 35 = a - 4b \\
	203 = 5 \times 35 + 28 \implies 28 = b - 5 \times (a - 4b) = 21b - 5a \\
	35 = 28 + 7 \implies 7 = (a - 4b) - (21b - 5a) = 6a - 25b\\
	28 = 4 \times 7
\end{gathered}
$$
That is, $7 = 6a - 25b$, or $7 = 6 \times 847 - 25 \times 203$.