---
tags:
- math-171/19
- alg
- math-171/20
---

### Euclidean domains

##### _example:_ the integers

In the integers, we can find the $\gcd$ of any two numbers by [[Superdiscrete --- math-55A/notes/Prime numbers#Euclid's algorithm|Euclid's algorithm]]. This works because we have the [[Superdiscrete --- math-55A/notes/Division and Euclid's algorithm#_theorem _ the division algorithm|the division algorithm]], which in turn, needs a notion of an order to work. A norm gives us this, and in turn, we will see, a form of Euclidean algorithm as well.

##### _definition:_ norm

If $R$ is an [[Abstract algebra --- math-171/notes/Rings#_definition _ integral domain|integral domain]], a function $N : R \to \mathbb{Z}_{\ge 0}$ such that $N(0) = 0$ is a norm.

##### _definition:_ Euclidean domain

An integral domain $R$ is a Euclidean domain if there is a norm $N$ on $R$ such that for all $a, b \in R$ ($b \neq 0$) there exist $q, r \in R$ with $a = qb + r$ such that $r = 0$ or $N(r) < N(b)$.

##### _examples:_ Euclidean domains

1) Every field is a Euclidean domain where any positive definite norm works — $a = qb + 0$ where $q = b a^{-1}$. Note that we need positive definiteness, otherwise we could have $N(b) = 0$, and thus $N(0) \not < N(b)$.
2) $\mathbb{Z}$ is a Euclidean domain (obviously)
3) If $\mathbb{F}$ is a field, $\mathbb{F}[x]$ is a Euclidean domain with the norm $N(p) = \deg p$.

##### _proposition:_ Euclidean domains are principal ideal domains

If $I$ is a nonzero ideal in a Euclidean domain, then $I = (d)$ where $d$ is any nonzero element of $I$ with minimum norm.

###### _proof:_

If $I = 0$, then $I = (0)$.

If $I$ is nonzero, then let $d \in I$ be the nonzero element with least norm. Then, if $a \in I$, write $a = qd + r$ with $N(r) < N(d)$. Thus, $r \in I$ and $N(r) < N(d)$ which by the minimality of the norm of $d$ in $I$, means $r = 0$.

##### _example:_ $R[x]$ is not always Euclidean

We can see that $(2, x)$ is not principal in $\mathbb{Z}[x]$, so $\mathbb{Z}[x]$ is not a Euclidean domain

This leads us obviously to the notion of division and greatest common divisors.

##### _definition:_ divides, greatest common divisor

Suppose $R$ is commutative, and $a, b \in R$ with $a$ nonzero, we say $a \mid b$ or $a$ divides $b$ there exists some $x \in R$ such that $b = ax$.

The greatest common divisor of $a$ and $b$ is some $d \neq 0$ such that $d \mid a$ and $d \mid b$, and if there exists any $d'$ such that $d' \mid a$ and $d' \mid b$, then $d' \mid d$.

Note that $d \mid a$ is equivalent to $a \in (d)$ is equivalent to $(a) \subset (d)$. Thus, equivalently, we can define

$d$ is the greatest common divisor of $a$ and $b$ if $(a, b) \subset (d)$ and if $(a, b) \subset (d')$, then $(d) \subset (d')$.

##### _definition:_ prime

A nonzero $p \in R$ is prime if $(p)$ is a prime ideal.

Equivalently, $p$ is prime if it is not a unit, and $p \mid ab$ implies $p \mid a$ or $p \mid b$.

##### _proposition:_ the ideal equality implies $\gcd$

Suppose $R$ is commutative with $a, b$ nonzero. If $(a, b) = (d)$ then $d$ is a $\gcd$ of $a$ and $b$.

###### _proof:_

We already have that $(a, b) \subset d$. If $(a, b) \subset (d')$, then $(d) \subset (d')$.

##### _example:_ $\gcd$ does not imply

In $\mathbb{Z}[x]$, $1$ is the $\gcd$ of $2$ and $x$, but $(2, x) \neq (1) = \mathbb{Z}[x]$.

##### _proposition:_ in an integral domain, $\gcd$s differ only by units

If $R$ is an integral domain, then for any $d, d' \in R$, $(d) = (d')$ if and only if $d' = ud$ for some unit $u \in R$. 

Specifically, if $d$ and $d'$ are $\gcd$s of the same $a, b \in R$, then $d' = ud$.

###### _proof:_

See [[Fourier analysis --- math-139/attachments/homework/hw 13/hw 13.pdf#page=7|Homework 13]] for the proof of the first part.

If $d$ and $d'$ are $\gcd$s of the same $a, b \in R$, then they divide each other, and thus, the ideals generated by them are subsets of each other. Then, by double containment, $(d) = (d')$.

To get further, again our motivating example is the integers.

##### _example:_ unique factorisation in $\mathbb{Z}$

We know that we have [[Superdiscrete --- math-55A/notes/Prime numbers#_theorem _ unique factorisation|unique factorisation]] in $\mathbb{Z}$. It would be nice to have it in other rings.

We want to get to this. The first step is principal ideal domains.

### Principal ideal domains

##### _definition:_ principal ideal domain

A principal ideal domain is an integral domain in which every ideal is [[Abstract algebra --- math-171/notes/Ideals and quotients#_definition _ principal ideal|principal]].

##### _example:_ $\mathbb{Z}$, obviously

##### _proposition:_ every prime ideal is maximal (in PID)

Every nonzero prime ideal in a principal ideal domain $R$ is a maximal ideal.

###### _proof:_

Suppose we have some prime ideal $(p)$, contained in some arbitrary ideal $(m)$. Then we must have $m \mid p$. Thus $m d = p$. Since $p$ is prime, $p \mid m$ or $p \mid d$.

If $p \mid m$, then since they divide each other, $(p) = (m)$.

If $p \mid d$, then we have $pd' = d$. Thus $mpd' = p$ giving us $md' = 1$ and thus, $(m)$ is a unit. Thus $(m) = R$.

Thus, the only 

A nice little proposition this gives us is that

##### _proposition:_ the polynomials are a PID only if the ring is a field

For a ring $R$, if $R[x]$ is a principal ideal domain, $R$ is a field.

###### _proof:_

Since $R[x]$ is a principal ideal domain, it is an integral domain, and thus, $R$, as a subring is an integral domain. Then since $R[x]/(x) \cong R$, $R[x] / (x)$ is an integral domain, and thus, $(x)$ [[Abstract algebra --- math-171/notes/Prime and maximal ideals#_proposition _ prime ideals have integral domains as quotients|is prime]], and thus, by the previous result is maximal, and finally, $R \cong R[x] / (x)$ is a field.

### Towards unique factorisation domains

There is a nice generalisation of the idea of a [[#_definition _ prime|prime]].

##### _definitions:_ irreducible elements of an integral domain, associate

Let $R$ be an integral domain.

For a nonzero, non-unit, $r \in R$, $r$ is irreducible if $r = ab$ implies that $a$ or $b$ is a unit.

For $a, b \in R$ we say $a, b$ are associates if $a = ub$ for some unit $u \in R$.

##### _examples:_ irreducible and prime elements

1) $x \in \mathbb{R}[x]$ is prime since $(x)$ is a prime ideal
2) $3 \in \mathbb{Z}$ is irreducible

As we would expect for a generalisation of primes, all primes are irreducible.

##### _proposition:_ all primes are irreducible

Let $R$ be an integral domain. If $p \in R$ is prime, then it is irreducible.

###### _proof:_

Suppose $p = ab$ for some $a, b \in R$. Then either $a$ or $b$ is in $(p)$. Without loss of generality, choose $a \in (p)$. Then we must have $a = pr$ for some $r \in R$. Thus, $p = prb$, and thus, $rb = 1$. That is, $b$ is a unit.

##### _example:_ not all irreducible elements are prime

Consider $3 \in \mathbb{Z}[\sqrt{ -5 }]$. It is irreducible (proof? trust me bro). It's not prime because $(2 + \sqrt{ -5 })(2 - \sqrt{ -5 }) = 9 \in (3)$ but $2 + \sqrt{ -5 }, 2 - \sqrt{ -5 } \not\in (3)$.

##### _propositions:_ in PIDs, the irreducible elements are exactly the primes

Suppose $R$ is a principal ideal domain. Then $p \in R$ is prime if and only if it is irreducible.

###### _proof:_

Since $R$ is a principal ideal domain, it is an integral domain, and thus, any prime is irreducible.

Suppose $p$ is irreducible. Let $(p) \subset (m)$ for some $m \in R$. Thus, $p \in (m)$, and thus, $p = mr$ for some $r \in R$. Since $p$ is irreducible $m$ is a unit, or $r$ is a unit. If $r$ is a unit, $(p) = (m)$, and if $m$ is a unit, $(m) = R$. Thus, $(p)$ is maximal, and [[Abstract algebra --- math-171/notes/Prime and maximal ideals#_corollary _ every maximal ideal is prime|thus, prime]].

##### _example:_ proving a ring isn't a PID

The previous result is a nice way to show a ring isn't a PID — just find an irreducible, non-prime element. $\mathbb{Z}[\sqrt{ -5 }]$ is not a principal ideal domain because $3$ is irreducible but not prime.

### Unique factorisation domains

We're finally getting where we wanted to be!

##### _definition:_ unique factorisation domains

A unique factorisation domain is an integral domain $R$ such that for any nonzero, non-unit $r \in R$, we have that
1) $r$ is a finite product of irreducible elements
2) the product is unique upto reordering and [[#_definitions _ irreducible elements of an integral domain, associate|associates]] (replacing an irreducible element with its associate).

##### _examples:_ unique factorisation domains

1) Every field is a UFD since because every nonzero element is a unit, so vacuously every element fulfils the property.
2) $\mathbb{Z}$ is a UFD, since [[Superdiscrete --- math-55A/notes/Prime numbers#_theorem _ unique factorisation|we already have unique factorisation into primes]] and primes are irreducible.

##### _non-examples:_

1) $\mathbb{Z}[\sqrt{ -5 }]$ is not a UFD since $6 = 2 \times 3 = (1 + \sqrt{ -5 })(1 - \sqrt{ -5 })$ are two distinct factorisations of $6$.
2) $\mathbb{Z}[2i]$ is an integral domain, but not a UFD since $2$ and $2i$ are not associates but $4 = 2 \times 2 = (-2i)(2i)$.

##### _proposition:_ in UFDs, the irreducible elements are exactly the primes

Suppose $R$ is a principal ideal domain. Then $p \in R$ is prime if and only if it is irreducible.

###### _proof:_

We already have that all the primes are irreducible since $R$ is an integral domain.

Suppose $p \in R$ is irreducible and $p = ab$ for some $a, b \in R$. Then note that $ab \in (p)$ and thus, $ab = pr$ for some $r \in R$.

Since we're in a UFD and $p$ is irreducible (and thus its own factorisation is just $p = p$), $p$ or an associate of $p$ must be in the unique factorisation of $a$ or $b$. Say, without loss of generality, $a = (up)t_{2} \cdots t_{n}$. Thus, $a \in (p)$, and $p$ is prime.

##### _example:_ proving a ring isn't a UFD

The previous result is a nice way to show a ring isn't a UFD — just find an irreducible, non-prime element. $\mathbb{Z}[\sqrt{ -5 }]$ is not a unique factorisation domain because $3$ is irreducible but not prime.

##### _theorem:_ Every PID is a UFD

###### _proof:_

We want to show that if $R$ is a PID, for every $r \in R$ we can factorise $r$ into a finite product of irreducible elements and that the factorisation is unique.

To show the first, notice that a prime factorisation is clearly irreducible and thus, will suffice. We will write $r = r_{1} r_{2}$ where $r_{1}, r_{2}$ are non-units. If this is not possible, then $r$ is irreducible and we are done. If we have $r = r_{1} r_{2}$, and $r_{1}$ is not irreducible, so we have $r_{1} = r_{11} r_{12}$, where $r_{11}, r_{12}$ are non-units and then if $r_{11}$ is not irreducible, and so on.

This would give us
$$
r = r_{1} r_{2} = (r_{11} r_{12}) r_{2} = ((r_{111} r_{112}) r_{12}) r_{2} = \cdots
$$
which (since $r_{2}, r_{12}, \dots$ are not units) gives us an infinite ascending chain
$$
(r) \subsetneq (r_{1}) \subsetneq (r_{11}) \subsetneq (r_{111}) \subsetneq \cdots
$$
where the non-equality comes from the fact that $r_{2}$, and all of the other "left over factors" are non-units by choice. Note that the union of all of these ideals is clearly an ideal. However, since we are in a principal ideal domain, we also have that it is generated by some $m \in R$. By definition, $m \in I$ for one of these ideals, and then the ascending chain breaks. That is, by contradiction, we cannot have an infinite ascending chain of ideals (such a ring is called Noetherian), and thus, we must eventually get $r$ as a finite product of irreducible elements.

Now we will show the uniqueness of the factorisation by induction on the number of factors.

In the case where we just have one factor, $r$ itself is irreducible, and thus, by definition, can only be factorised into its associates.

Suppose factorisation is unique for all factorisations of length between $1$ and $k$ (inclusive). Suppose that $r = p_{1} \cdots p_{k + 1} = q_{1} \cdots q_{m}$ where all $p_{i}$ are irreducible and all $q_{i}$ are irreducible. Note that we must have $m \ge k + 1$ otherwise the inductive hypothesis would break.

Since $p_{1}$ is irreducible, and we're in a PID, $p_{1}$ is prime. Thus, some $q_1 \cdots q_{m} \in (p_{1})$ gives us some $q_{i} \in (p_{1})$, which means that $q_{i} = p_{1} u$ where $u \in R$. Since $q_{i}$ is irreducible and $p_{1}$ is prime and thus, not a unit, $u$ must be a unit.

Choose without loss of generality that $q_{1} = q_{i}$ (because of commutativity, we can just renumber as needed). Thus, cancelling out $p_{1}$ on both sides of the factorisations gives us
$$
p_{2} \cdots p_{k + 1} = uq_{2} \cdots q_{m}.
$$

Then, by our induction hypothesis, (the list on the left is of length $k$), since there is unique factorisation $u q_{2}, \cdots q_{m}$ is just a reordering/associates of $p_{2} \cdots p_{k + 1}$, and since $q_{1}$ is an associate of $p_{1}$, this is true for the full factorisation of $r$.

##### _corollary:_ $\mathbb{Z}$ is a UFD

---

##### _proposition:_ UFDs are preserved by localisation

Suppose $A$ is a UFD. Then any non-zero [[Commutative algebra --- math-189AA/notes/Localisation of a ring#_definition _ localisation of a ring, localisations at a prime, fraction field|localisation]] $S^{-1} A$ is also a UFD.

###### _proof:_

>[!missing]

---