---
tags:
- comm-alg
- math-189AA/3
---

### Contraction

Note that prime ideals can be pulled back along a ring homomorphism.

##### _proposition:_ prime ideals can be pulled back

If $\varphi : A \to B$ is a ring homomorphism and $\mathfrak{p} \subseteq B$ is a prime ideal, then $\varphi^\text{pre}(\mathfrak{p})$ is a prime ideal.

###### _proof:_

Let $\mathfrak{i} = \varphi^\text{pre}(\mathfrak{p})$. It's not difficult to show it is an ideal. If $a_{1}, a_{2} \in \mathfrak{i}$, then $\varphi(a_{1} + a_{2}) = \varphi(a_{1}) + \varphi(a_{2}) \in \mathfrak{p}$ and similarly, for any $\lambda \in A, a \in \mathfrak{i}$, we have $\varphi(\lambda a) = \varphi(\lambda) \varphi(a) \in \mathfrak{p}$.

Note that we have a map $A \to B \to B / \mathfrak{p}$ with $\varphi^\text{pre}(\mathfrak{p})$ contained in the kernel (since its image is within $\mathfrak{p}$ under , which is sent to $0$ in $B$). Thus, by the first isomorphism theorem, $A / \varphi^\text{pre}(\mathfrak{p}) \to B / \mathfrak{p}$ is an injection into an [[Abstract algebra --- math-171/notes/Integral domains#_definition _ integral domain|integral domain]]. It's not difficult to show that this forces $A / \varphi^\text{pre}(\mathfrak{p})$ to be an integral domain, and [[Abstract algebra --- math-171/notes/Prime and maximal ideals#_proposition _ prime ideals have integral domains as quotients|thus]], $\varphi^\text{pre}(\mathfrak{p})$ to be prime.

This generalises to general ideals — the same proof shows that ideals pull back.

>[! missing]
> explanation for why the map $A / \mathfrak{p}^\text{c} \to B / \mathfrak{p}$ is an injection. Show ideal containment in the opposite direction?

##### _definition:_ contraction

If $\varphi : A \to B$ is a ring homomorphism and $\mathfrak{i} \subseteq B$ is an ideal, then $\varphi^\text{pre}(\mathfrak{i})$ is an ideal of $A$, called the contraction of $\mathfrak{i}$ (under $\varphi$).

The contraction of $\mathfrak{i}$ is sometimes denoted $\mathfrak{i}^\text{c}$.

### Extension

We could try to do the same thing under pushing forward ideals, but it doesn't quite work. For example, $A \to A[x]$ has pushforwards of ideals. Further, even when it does work, it isn't quite so nice. For example, $\mathfrak{m} \subseteq A$ maximal doesn't necessitate $\varphi^\text{img}(\mathfrak{m}) \subseteq B$ maximal — consider $(7) \subseteq \mathbb{Z}$ sent to all of $\mathbb{Z} / (12)$ under the map $\mathbb{Z} \to \mathbb{Z} / (12)$.

##### _definition:_ extension

IF $\mathfrak{i} \subseteq A$ is an ideal and $\varphi : A \to B$ a ring homomorphism, then the extension of $\mathfrak{i}$ to $B$ is the ideal $(\varphi^\text{img}(\mathfrak{i}))$ generated by $\varphi^\text{img}(\mathfrak{i})$.

It is sometimes denoted $\mathfrak{i}^\text{e}$.