---
tags:
- comm-alg
- math-189AA/6
- math-189AA/7
---

Let $A$ be a (commutative, unital) ring.

You may not have seen modules before, but you have seen modules. For example all abelian groups and rings have a $\mathbb{Z}$-module structure — you can make sense of scaling by elements of $\mathbb{Z}$ (either by $n \cdot g = g + \dots + g$ or $n \cdot a = \varphi(n) a$ for $\varphi : \mathbb{Z} \to A$). $A$-modules generalise these $\mathbb{Z}$-modules (and [[Linear algebra done right --- ladr/notes/Vector spaces#_definition _ vector space|vector spaces]] in general) by allowing scalars in an arbitrary ring $A$.

##### _definition:_ module

An $A$-module $M$ is an [[Abstract algebra --- math-171/notes/Groups, and why you should care#_definition _ abelian group, commutative group|abelian group]] (written additively) with a linear ring action of $A$ on $M$, or equivalently, a ring homomorphism $A \to Z(\operatorname{End} M)$ 

Here $\operatorname{End} M$ is given a (not)-necessarily commutative unital ring structure by composition, $Z(\operatorname{End} M)$ is its centre, and the morphism preserves identity by $1 \mapsto \operatorname{id}_{M}$.

---

##### _examples and non-examples:_ modules

1) $0$ is a module over every ring
2) $A$ is an $A$-module
3) The $\mathbb{Z}$-modules are exactly the abelian groups
4) The $\mathbb{F}$-modules are exactly the $\mathbb{F}$-vector spaces
5) Every ideal $\mathfrak{i} \subseteq A$ is an $A$-module, and so is every $A / \mathfrak{i}$
6) More generally, every ring homomorphism $\varphi : A \to B$ defines an $A$-module structure on $B$ by $ab = \varphi(a) b$.
7) $\mathbb{Q}$ is a $\mathbb{Z}$-module, but $\mathbb{Z}$ is not a $\mathbb{Q}$-ideal
8) In fact, $\mathbb{Z}$ is not a $\mathbb{Q}$-module under any scaling. Consider $n(1 / n) \cdot z = z$. Let $(1/n) \cdot z = y \in \mathbb{Z}$. Then $n \cdot y = z$. Writing $n = 1 + \dots + 1$, we get $ny = z$. Thus, all $n \in \mathbb{N}$ divide $z \in \mathbb{Z}$. There is no such $z \in \mathbb{Z}$.
9) In general, localisation $S^{-1} A$ is an $A$-module
10) $\mathbb{Q}$ is a $\mathbb{Q}$-module under addition, but not under multiplication
11) $\mathbb{C}[x]$ is $\mathbb{C}[x]$-module with scaling by $\lambda \in \mathbb{C}$ as usual, but scaling by $x$ corresponds to taking derivatives (with respect to $x$).

---

##### _homework:_ show that $\mathbb{C}[x]$ is a $\mathbb{C}[x]$-module under derivatives

---

##### _homework:_ is an $A$-module $M$ an $A / \operatorname{Ann}_{A} M$-module?

---

### Submodules

##### _definition:_ submodule, proper submodule

A **submodule** $N \subseteq M$ is a (non-empty) subgroup of $M$ closed under scaling by $A$.

$N$ is a proper submodule if $N \neq M$.

---

We don't have to check the whole subgroup definition to check that $N \subseteq M$ is a submodule.

##### _proposition:_ the submodule criterion

A subset $N \subseteq M$ is a submodule of $M$ if it is non-empty and $n_{1} + a n_{2} \in N$ for all $n_{1}, n_{2} \in N$ and $a \in A$.

---

##### _example:_ submodules

1) The submodules of a ring are exactly its [[Abstract algebra --- math-171/notes/Ideals and quotients#_definition _ ideal|ideals]].
2) The submodules of a $\mathbb{Z}$-module are exactly its subgroups.
3) $(0)$ and $M$ are submodules of any module $M$.
4) For $a \in A$, $a M = \{ am \mid m \in M \}$ is a submodule of $M$.
5) The **cyclic submodule** generated by $m \in M$ is $\left< m \right> = \{ a m \mid a \in A \}$. 
6) In general, the **submodule generated by a subset** $X = \{ x_{i} \mid \}$ is $\left< X \right> = \left\{  \sum_{\text{finite}} a_{i} x_{i} \mid a_{i} \in A  \right\}$
7) The **torsion submodule** of $M$ is the set of **torsion elements** $m \in M$ with $\operatorname{Ann}_{A} m \neq 0$. It forms a submodule. In some other settings torsion requires $\operatorname{Ann}_{A} m$ to contain a non-zero-divisor.

---

##### _definition:_ finitely generated

An module $M$ is finitely generated if $M = \left< X \right>$ for some finite set $X$.

---

##### _non-example:_ $\mathbb{Q}$ is not finitely generated over $\mathbb{Z}$

$\mathbb{Q} = \left< \{ 1 / p^n \mid p \text{ prime} \} \right>$.

---

##### _example:_ $\mathbb{Z} / (3)$ is finitely generated over $\mathbb{Z}$

It's finite!

---

### Quotient modules

##### _definition:_ quotient module

Given a submodule $N \subseteq M$, the quotient module $M / N$ is the abelian group $M / N$ with scaling defined by $a(m + N) = am + N$.

##### _examples:_ quotient modules

1) For any ideal $\mathfrak{i} \subseteq A$, the quotient ring $A / \mathfrak{i}$ has the structure of an $A$-module, and also has the structure of a quotient module of $A$ over itself.
2) $\mathbb{Q} / \mathbb{Z}$ is a (torsion) $\mathbb{Z}$-module.

### New modules from old

There are lots more constructions of new modules.

##### _definition:_ direct products of modules

The **direct product** of $A$-modules $M_{i}$ indexed by $i \in \mathscr{I}$ is
$$
\prod_{i \in \mathscr{I}} M_{i} = \{ (m_{i})_{i \in \mathscr{I}} \mid m_{i} \in M_{i} \}
$$
with addition and scaling defined pointwise.

---

##### _definition:_ direct sums of modules

The **direct sum** of $A$-modules $M_{i}$ indexed by $i \in \mathscr{I}$ is
$$
\bigoplus_{i \in \mathscr{I}} M_{i} = \{ (m_{i})_{i \in \mathscr{I}} \mid m_{i} \in M_{i}, \# \{ m_{i} \neq 0 \} < \infty \}.
$$
with addition and scaling defined pointwise.

---

This satisfies the universal property of the [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Universal properties and why categories?#_definition _ coproducts, direct sums|coproduct]]. Note that for $\mathscr{I}$ finite, this is just the direct product and thus, satisfies [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Limits and colimits#_examples _ products and fibred products as limits|its universal property]] as well.

##### _definition:_ free modules

$A$-modules $\bigoplus_{i \in \mathscr{I}} A$  are called **free modules**.

---

We love free modules because they have bases.

##### _example:_ free modules

The free $\mathbb{Z}$-modules are the free abelian groups. For example, $\mathbb{Z}^{2}$ is generated by $(1, 0), (0, 1)$.

---

##### _definition:_ localisation of a module

Given a multiplicative set $S \subseteq A$, we can construct an $A$-module and $S^{-1} A$-module by localising away from $S$. This is the **localisation of $M$ away from $S$**
$$
S^{-1} M = \{  m / s \mid m \in M, s \in S \} / \sim
$$
where $m_{1} / s_{1} \sim m_{2} / s_{2}$ exactly when $s(m_{1} s_{2} - m_{2} s_{1}) = 0$ for some $s \in S$.

Addition and scaling are defined in the obvious way.

---

The localisation of an $A$-module [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Localisation, categorically#_construction _ localisation of a module|is initial]] among all $A$-module morphisms $M \to N$ that are actually $S^{-1} A$-module morphisms.

##### _example:_ localising a quotient ring as a module

$(\mathbb{Z} / (6))_{(0)}$ localised as a $\mathbb{Z}$-module is just $0$. This can be seen as a fact about annihilators — $\operatorname{Ann}_{\mathbb{Z}_{(0)}} \mathbb{Z} / (6) = (\operatorname{Ann}_{\mathbb{Z}} \mathbb{Z} / (6))_{(0)} = (6)_{(0)} = \mathbb{Z}$.

---