---
tags:
- comm-alg
- math-189AA/8
---

Let $M, N, P$ be $A$-modules. The isomorphism theorems give us useful isomorphisms from situations that often come up. Most of these are the general cases of [[Abstract algebra --- math-171/notes/Ring isomorphism theorems|ring isomorphism theorems]].

##### _theorem:_ first isomorphism theorem

Suppose $\varphi : M \to N$ is an $A$-module homomorphism. Then $\ker \varphi$ is a submodule of $M$ such that $M / \ker \varphi \cong \operatorname{img} \varphi$. 

There is a unique map $\bar{\varphi} : M / \ker \varphi \to \operatorname{img} \varphi$ by $m + \ker \varphi \mapsto \varphi(m)$ so that the following diagram commutes
```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}
\usepackage{amsfonts}
\begin{document}
	\begin{tikzcd}
		M \ar[r, "\varphi"] \ar[d, two heads] & N \\
		M \ar[r, "\bar{\varphi}"] & \mathrm{img} \, \varphi \ar[u, hook]
	\end{tikzcd}
\end{document}
```

---

To see an example of how this is useful, we classify cyclic modules (modules generated by one element).

##### _proposition:_ classifying cyclic modules

Suppose $M$ is a cyclic $A$-module. Then $M$ is isomorphic (as an $A$-module) to quotient ring of $A$.

###### _proof:_

Suppose $M = \left< x \right>$. Then consider $A \to M$ by $a \mapsto a x$. It is surjective since the image contains $m$ which generates all of $M$. It has kernel $\operatorname{Ann} M$ since $ax = 0$ implies $am = 0$ for all $m$. By the first isomorphism theorem we have $A / \operatorname{Ann} M \cong M$.

---

More generally, we can do something similar to show that any finitely generated module $M$ (generated by $x_{1}, \dots, x_{n}$ say) is a quotient of a free module. Just consider $A^{\oplus n} \to M$ by $e_{i} \mapsto x_{i}$.

---

##### _theorem:_ second isomorphism theorem

Suppose $N, P \subseteq M$ are submodules of $M$. Then
$$
\frac{N + P}{N} \cong \frac{N}{N \cap P}.
$$

---

##### _theorem:_ third isomorphism theorem

Suppose $P \subseteq N \subseteq M$ are submodules of $M$. Then
$$
\frac{M / P}{N / P} \cong M / N.
$$

###### _proof sketch:_

Consider the map $\varphi : m + P \mapsto m + N$, show it is surjective with kernel $N / P$. Use the first isomorphism theorem.

---

##### _theorem:_ fourth isomorphism theorem

Suppose $N \subseteq M$ is a submodule. Then there is a bijection
$$
\{ \text{submodules of } M \text{ containing } N \} \to \{ \text{submodules of } M / N \}
$$
that commutes with sums and intersections.

###### _proof sketch:_

Check that $P \mapsto P / N$ gives $(P_{1} + P_{2}) / N = P_{1} / N + P_{2} / N$ and $(P_{1} \cap P_{2})/ N = (P_{1} / N) \cap (P_{2} / N)$.

---