---
tags:
- top
- math-147/6
- math-147/7
- math-147/8
---

Let $(X, \mathcal{T})$ be a topological space (unless otherwise stated).

Just like [[Linear algebra done right --- ladr/notes/Bases|bases]] of vector spaces generate all the vectors in the space, bases of topological spaces generate all the open sets in a space. That is,

##### _definition:_ basis

A basis $\mathcal{B}$ of a topology $\mathcal{T}$ on $X$ is a subset of $\mathcal{T}$ such that every open set in $\mathcal{T}$ is a union of open sets in $\mathcal{B}$.

We say $\mathcal{T}$ is generated by $\mathcal{B}$.

The elements of $\mathcal{B}$ are called basic open sets.

We don't have to check that a collection of open sets is a basis directly every time. Instead, we can check by neighbourhood.

##### _proposition:_ equivalent conditions to be a basis of a specific topology

A subset $\mathcal{B} \subseteq \mathcal{T}$ is a basis if and only if, for each open set $U \subseteq X$ and point $p \in U$, there is a basic open set $V$ such that $p \in V \subseteq U$. That is, every point in an open set has  a basic open neighbourhood contained in the open set.

###### _proof:_

Suppose we have the desired condition. Then, for each open set $U \subseteq X$ and each point $p \in U$, we have a basic [[Topology --- math-147/notes/Topologies#_proposition, definition _ checking openness by neighbourhood, neighbourhood|open neighbourhood]] of $x$, say $V_{p} \in \mathcal{B}$, contained in $U$. The union of these is $U$. That is, $U$ is the union of basic open sets.

Suppose $\mathcal{B}$ is a basis and by way of contradiction, there is a point $x$ in an open set $U$ with no basic open neighbourhood $V_{p} \subseteq U, V_{p} \in \mathcal{B}$. Then $U$ cannot be written as the union of basic open sets of $\mathcal{B}$ — $p$ is not contained in any union of basic open sets.

##### _example:_ bases of the real line

There are two complementary bases of the Euclidean topology on $\mathbb{R}$ —
1) $\mathcal{B}_{1} = \{ (a, b) \subseteq \mathbb{R} \mid a, b \in \mathbb{Q} \}$ — this follows by the fact that [[Mathematical Analysis I --- math-131/attachments/homework/hw 1/hw 1.pdf#page=5|rationals are dense in the reals]]. As a result, any open ball around $x$ $(x - r, x + r)$ contains a rational $a$ between $x - r$ and $x$ and another, $b$, between $x$ and $x + r$. Then $(a, b)$ is contained in the open ball, and thus, in any open set containing $x$.
2) $\mathcal{B}_{2} = \{ (a, b) \cup (c, d) \mid a < b < c < d \in \mathbb{R} \setminus \mathbb{Q}\}$.

##### _examples:_ a dumb basis

A topology is its own basis

We also might want an easier way to check that a basis forms any topology at all, not necessarily a specific one.

##### _proposition:_ equivalent conditions to be a basis of any topology

If $X$ is a set and $\mathcal{B}$ is a collection of subsets of $X$, then $\mathcal{B}$ is the basis of a topology on $X$ if and only if each point of $X$ is in some basic open set, and the intersection of any two basic open sets $U, V \in \mathcal{B}$ is covered by basic open neighbourhoods — for all $p \in U \cap V$, there is some $W \in \mathcal{B}$ with $p \in W \subseteq U \cap V$.

###### _proof:_

First we will show the conditions are necessary. Suppose the topology generated by $\mathcal{B}$ is $\mathcal{T}$. Since we must have $X \in \mathcal{T}$, we must indeed have every $x \in X$ contained in some basic open set. Since any $U, V \in \mathcal{B} \subseteq \mathcal{T}$ are open sets, so is their intersection, and thus, by our previous result, $U \cap V$ is covered by basic open neighbourhoods as desired.

Now suppose we have the conditions. We will show they are sufficient for $\mathcal{B}$ to generate a topology. Let $\mathcal{T}$ be the set of all unions of sets in $\mathcal{B}$. $X \in \mathcal{T}$ since each point $x \in X$ is in some basic open set, and $\emptyset \in \mathcal{T}$ vacuously. 

Since every open set is union of basic open sets, and thus, every union of these open sets is the union of the underlying basic open sets. That is, every union of open sets is open. 

Finally, if $U$ and $V$ are open, they are covered by basic open sets. Thus, each $x \in U \cap V$ is in basic open sets $U_{x}$ and $V_{x}$ and thus, in the set $U_{x} \cap V_{x} \subseteq U \cap V$. By the second condition, $U_{x} \cap V_{x}$ has a basic open neighbourhood $W_{x} \subseteq U_{x} \cap V_{x} \subseteq U \cap V$. Unioning all these basic open neighbourhoods $W_{x}$ just gets us $U \cap V$.

### Generating interesting topologies with bases

##### _example:_ lower limit topology

We can generate the lower limit topology on $\mathbb{R}$ from the basis $\{ [a, b) \subseteq \mathbb{R} \mid a, b \in \mathbb{R} \}$. We often call this $\mathbb{R}_{\text{LL}}$, but it's also called the Sorgenfrey line or $\mathbb{R}^1_{\text{bad}}$.

This is because each $x \in \mathbb{R}_{\text{LL}}$ is contained in, say $[x, x + 1)$, and each intersection looks like a basis element $[a, b)$.

It's clear that $\mathbb{R}_{\text{LL}}$ has open sets that are not open in $\mathbb{R}$ — $[a, b)$ is not open in Euclidean $\mathbb{R}$. However, every open set in Euclidean $\mathbb{R}$ is open in $\mathbb{R}_{\text{LL}}$ we can see this by showing that each basic open set in the basis of open intervals is contained is open in $\mathbb{R}_{\text{LL}}$. That is, consider the union
$$
(a, b) = \bigcup_{x \in (a, b)} [x, b).
$$

Now seems as good a time as any to introduce the notion of the strength of a topology.

##### _definition:_ strength of a topology, coarser, finer

Given two topologies $\mathcal{T_{1}}$ and $\mathcal{T}_{2}$ on $X$, if $\mathcal{T}_{1} \subseteq \mathcal{T}_{2}$, we say $\mathcal{T}_{1}$ is weaker and coarser than $\mathcal{T}_{2}$ and $\mathcal{T}_{2}$ is stronger and finer than $\mathcal{T}_{1}$. 

We add strictly to these descriptors if the inclusion is proper.

##### _example:_ incomparable topologies

The Euclidean topology on $\mathbb{R}$ clearly contains open sets, like open intervals $(a, b)$, that the [[Topology --- math-147/notes/Topologies#_example _ the finite and countable complement topologies|cocountable]] topology does not. However the cocountable topology has $\mathbb{R} \setminus \{ 1 / n \mid n \in \mathbb{N} \}$ open, which the Euclidean topology does not. This is because its complement $\{ 1/n \mid n \in \mathbb{N} \}$ is [[Topology --- math-147/notes/Limit points and closed sets#_theorem _ closed sets are complements of open sets|not closed]].

Also, the twopological space $(\mathbb{R}, \{ \mathbb{R}, \emptyset, \{ 2 \} \})$ is incomparable with the Euclidean topology on $\mathbb{R}$.

##### _example:_ the double-headed snake

Let $\mathbb{R}_{+00}$ be the set $\mathbb{R}_{+} \cup \{ 0_{1}, 0_{2} \}$ — the positive numbers and two different zeroes. Consider the topology with the consisting of all open intervals in $\mathbb{R}_{+}$ and all $[0_{1}, b) := (0, b) \cup \{ 0_{1} \}$ and $[0_{2}, b) := (0, b) \cup \{ 0_{2} \}$.

Since the open intervals form the basis of an open set, we only need to check that the intersection of two basic open sets contains a basic open neighbourhood of each point.

This is actually the precursor to the idea of a [[Topology --- math-147/notes/Quotient and identification spaces|quotient space]] — $\mathbb{R}_{+00}$ is $\mathbb{R}_{\ge 0} \sqcup \mathbb{R}_{\ge 0} / \sim$ where the equivalence relation sets both copies of each positive $x$ to be equivalent. What this equivalence relation is doing is saying that all the points are the same except the zeroes. But because all the neighbourhoods of the zeroes have to contain other points, topologically we can't tell the zeroes apart.  That is, there are no disjoint open sets $U$ and $V$ so that $0_{1} \in U$ and $0_{2} \in V$. 

Suppose $U, V$ are open sets with $0_{1} \in U$ and $0_{2} \in V$. Thus, for some $b_{1}, b_{2} \in \mathbb{R}$, we have $[0_{1}, b_{1}) \subseteq U$ and $[0_{2}, b_{2}) \subseteq V$. Choosing any $a < \min \{ b_{1}, b_{2} \}$ we get $a$ in each basic open set, and thus, $a \in U \cap V$. That is, $U$ and $V$ cannot be disjoint.

##### _example:_ the harmonic complement topology

$\mathbb{R}_{\text{har}}$ is the topological space on $\mathbb{R}$ with a basis consisting of open intervals $(a, b)$ and open intervals with the harmonic sequence removed — $(a, b) \setminus H$ for $H = \{ 1 / n \mid n \in \mathbb{N} \}$.

Note however, that $-H = \{ -1 / n \mid n \in \mathbb{N} \}$ still has limit point $0$, since every open set containing zero contains some $(- r, r)$ possibly excluding some points greater than zero, but still including all the points less than $0$, and thus, including the negative harmonic sequence.

While $0$ is not a limit point of $H$ — but we cannot separate them with disjoint open sets since every open set containing $H$ contains an open neighbourhood of each $1 / n$. If an open set containing $0$ contains $(-r, r)$ we are done. Suppose not. Since every open interval containing $0$ contains some $1 / n$, and thus, any other (not an open interval) basic open set containing $0$ contains $(1 / n - r, 1 / n) \cup (1 / n, 1 / n + r)$ for some $r > 0$.

##### _example:_ the sticky bubble topology

There is a really funky topology on the (closed) upper half-plane $\mathbb{H} = \{ (x, y) \in \mathbb{R}^{2} \mid y \ge 0 \}$. The basis consists all the regular balls contained in the plane, with the addition of sticky bubbles — sets $B((x, y), r) \cup \{ (x, 0) \}$ for $r = y >0$. The resulting topological space is called $\mathbb{H}_{\text{bub}}$.

This is a really interesting topology for reasons of separation properties. In particular, if we [[Mathematical Analysis I --- math-131/notes/Metric subspaces|use the idea of subspace topologies]] from real analysis, we'd see that $\mathbb{R} \times \{ 0 \}$ is given the [[Topology --- math-147/notes/Topologies#_example _ the discrete and indiscrete topologies|discrete topology]]. (Does this carry over to topological spaces in general? We'll find out soon).

Notice that the only basic open sets containing points in the $x$-axis are the sticky bubbles. Each of the non-stuck points in a sticky bubble can be separated from $x$-axis $\mathbb{R} \times \{ 0 \}$ by a non-sticky bubble of the same centre and radius. Further, each of the points on $\mathbb{R} \times \{ 0 \}$ has an open-neighbourhood that contains no other points on $\mathbb{R} \times \{ 0 \}$ — the sticky bubble at the point. Thus, every subset of the $x$-axis is closed. In particular, the closure of the rationals $\mathbb{Q} \times \{ 0 \}$, is just itself.

Furthermore, we can separate any subset $A \subseteq \mathbb{R} \times \{ 0 \}$ from any point $x \in \mathbb{R} \times \{0  \}$ not in $A$ using open sets. In particular, choose any sticky bubble $U$ (of radius, say $r$) stuck on $x$, and using geometry, draw a sticky bubble around each $a \in A$ that doesn't intersect with $U$.

In fact, we can separate any two countable sets $A, B \subseteq \mathbb{R} \times \{ 0 \}$. Just draw sticky bubbles around $a_{1}, b_{1}, a_{2}, b_{2} \dots$ such that each $n$th bubble intersects none of the previous bubbles.

However, we cannot separate $\mathbb{Q} \times \{ 0 \}$ and $\mathbb{R} \setminus \mathbb{Q} \times \{ 0 \}$. We do this by bubbling under bubbles.

##### _example:_ Furstenberg's proof of the infinitude of the primes

Hillel Furstenberg gave a "topological" proof of the infinitude of the primes when he was only 19!

Essentially, he used the fact that the arithmetic progressions on $\mathbb{Z}$ characterise the arithmetic structure, and thus, the [[Superdiscrete --- math-55A/notes/Euclid's algorithm and primes#_definition _ prime numbers|primes]]. Using a basis $\mathcal{B}$ of arithmetic progressions $\{ az  + b \mid z \in \mathbb{Z} \}$ (where $a, b \in \mathbb{Z}$) on $\mathbb{Z}$, we can generate a topology — all of $\mathbb{Z}$ is an arithmetic progression, the intersection of arithmetic progressions $\{ a z + b \}$ and $\{ cz + d \}$ is the arithmetic progression $\{ \operatorname{lcm}(a, c) z + z_{0} \}$ if they have some common $z_{0}$ and $\operatorname{Ø}$ otherwise. We call the resulting topological space $\mathbb{Z}_{\text{arith}}$.

Note that each [[Abstract Algebra I --- math-171/notes/Ideals and quotients#_definition _ ideal|ideal]] $p\mathbb{Z}$ is an arithmetic progression and thus, open, but also so is every $p\mathbb{Z} + b$ where $b$ is not a multiple of $p$. Thus, $\mathbb{Z} \setminus p\mathbb{Z} = \bigcup_{b = 1}^{p - 1} p\mathbb{Z} + b$ is open and $p\mathbb{Z}$ is closed. The union of all of these ideals is just $\mathbb{Z} \setminus \{ -1, 1 \}$. But $\{ -1, 1 \}$ is not open since every arithmetic progression contains more than just two numbers. [[Topology --- math-147/notes/Limit points and closed sets#_theorem _ closed sets are complements of open sets|Thus,]] the union of all these closed $p\mathbb{Z}$ is not closed. For this to be true, there [[Topology --- math-147/notes/Limit points and closed sets#_theorem _ finite unions and arbitrary intersections of closed sets are closed|infinitely many closed sets]].

If we choose a different topology $\mathbb{Z}_{\text{coprime}}$ with basis $\{ a\mathbb{Z} + b \mid \gcd(a, b) = 1 \}$, then Dirichlet's theorem is just the statement that the primes are dense in $\mathbb{Z}_{\text{coprime}}$.