---
tags:
- math-147/12
- math-147/13
- top
---

Let $(X, \mathcal{T})$ be a topological space.

In topology, we want to have a notion of our spaces being too large or too small.

### Separable spaces

Even though $\mathbb{R}$ is really big in terms of [[Mathematical Analysis I --- math-131/notes/Countability#_definition _ cardinality|cardinality]], because it has a countable subset $\mathbb{Q}$, which every point can be approximated by, $\mathbb{R}$ is not so large for a topological space. This is the notion that separability is trying to get at.

To make this definition, we need a topological definition of what it means for a set to approximate the whole space.

##### _definition:_ dense

A subset $A \subseteq X$ is dense in $X$ if its [[Topology --- math-147/notes/Limit points and closed sets#_definition _ closure, closed|closure]] is the whole space.

##### _proposition:_ dense sets have non-empty intersection with every open set

$A$ is dense in $X$ if and only if every non-empty open set in $X$ intersects $A$.

###### _proof:_

Suppose $A$ is dense in $X$. Consider a non-empty open set $U$ with $x \in U$. If $x \in A$, we are done. If $x \not\in A$, [[Topology --- math-147/notes/Limit points and closed sets#_proposition _ limit points not in the set|every open neighbourhood of]] $x$ must have non-empty intersection with $A$, and thus, so does $U$.

##### _definition:_ separable

$X$ is separable if it has a countable dense subset.

##### _counterexample:_ separability is not necessarily inherited by subspaces

The [[Topology --- math-147/notes/Bases#_example _ the sticky bubble topology|sticky bubble topology]] is has a countable dense subset $\mathbb{Q} \times \mathbb{Q}_{\ge 0}$ since every bubble, sticky or not, must contain a point with rational coordinates.

However, the real line $\mathbb{R} \times \{ 0 \}$ [[Topology --- math-147/notes/Subspaces#_definition _ subspace topology|inherits]] the [[Topology --- math-147/notes/Topologies#_example _ the discrete and indiscrete topologies|discrete topology]] and is uncountable. Since $\{ x \}$ is an open set for every $x \in \mathbb{R}$, the only dense subset is all of the subspace, and thus, uncountable. That is $\mathbb{R} \times \{ 0 \}$ is not separable.

However, separability does descend to (finite) products.

##### _proposition:_ product of separable spaces is separable

Suppose $X$ and $Y$ are separable spaces. Then $X \times Y$ is separable.

###### _proof:_

Let $A_{X}$ and $A_{Y}$ be countable dense subsets in $X$ and $Y$ respectively. Their product $A_{X} \times A_{Y}$ is countable too (as the finite product of countable sets). We claim it is dense in $X \times Y$ too.

The on $X \times Y$ [[Topology --- math-147/notes/Product spaces#_definition _ (finite) product topology|is generated by]] $U \times V$ where $U \subseteq X$ and $V \subseteq Y$ are open. Any non-empty open subset $W \subseteq X \times Y$ contains some such $U \times V$. Since $A_{X}$ and $A_{Y}$ are dense in $X$ and $Y$, the non-empty sets $U$ and $V$ each contain a point $x$ of $A_{X}$ and $y \in A_{Y}$ respectively. Thus, $(x, y) \in (A_{X} \times A_{Y}) \cap W$ so $(A_{X} \times A_{Y}) \cap W$ is always non-empty. This is equivalent to $A_{X} \times A_{Y}$ being dense in $X \times Y$.

##### _example:_ $2^\mathbb{R}$ is separable

By definition of the [[Topology --- math-147/notes/Product spaces#_definition _ (finite) product topology|product topology]], each open set in $2^\mathbb{R}$ contains all the subsets of $\mathbb{R}$ between $A$ and ${\mathbb{R} \setminus B}$ in the inclusion poset on the subsets of $\mathbb{R}$ with $A, B$ finite. Drawing rational intervals around each of the finite points in $A$ without including any of the points in $B$ gives a subset between $A$ and $\mathbb{R} \setminus B$ in the poset. Thus, every open set contains some finite union of rational intervals. 

The set of all finite unions of rational intervals has cardinality at most that of $(\mathbb{Q} \times \mathbb{Q}) \times \mathbb{N} \times \mathbb{N}$ (there are at most $\lvert \mathbb{Q} \times \mathbb{Q} \rvert$ rational intervals, there are $\lvert \mathbb{N} \rvert$ choices for how many of them to take the union of, and there countably many subsets of $\mathbb{N}$ of size $n$ since they can be injected into $\mathbb{N}^n$)

### Second countable spaces

A stronger notion of small size is second countability. Here, we don't just require a dense countable set, but a countable basis. We will see that this in fact implies separability.

##### _definition:_ second countable

$X$ is second countable if $X$ has a countable [[Topology --- math-147/notes/Bases#_definition _ basis|basis]].

##### _theorem:_ second countability implies separability

If $X$ is second countable, it is separable.

###### _proof:_

Given a countable basis $\mathcal{B} = \{ U_{1}, U_{2}, \dots \}$ of $X$, choose a point $p_{n} \in U_{n}$ for each $n \in \mathbb{N}$. By definition (of a basis) any non-empty open set is the union of basic open sets, and thus, contains at least one $U_{n}$. Thus, every non-empty open set contains some $p_{n}$. This is equivalent to the countable set $\{ p_{1}, p_{2}, \dots \}$ being dense in $X$.

Much like with the [[Topology --- math-147/notes/Compactness#_theorem _ the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem|Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem]], if you try to put a lot of points into a sufficiently small space, then they will have to accumulate somewhere.

##### _proposition:_ uncountable sets in a second countable space have limit points

If $X$ is second countable and $A \subseteq X$ is [[Mathematical Analysis I --- math-131/notes/Countability#Uncountable sets|uncountable]], $A$ has a [[Topology --- math-147/notes/Limit points and closed sets#_definition _ limit point|limit point]] in $X$.

###### _proof:_

Suppose by way of contradiction that $A$ does not have a limit point. Then every point $x \not\in A$ has an open neighbourhood $U_{x}$ not intersecting $A$ and every point $a \in A$ has an open neighbourhood $U_{a}$ that has empty intersection with ${A \setminus a}$. 

Since each open neighbourhood contains at most one point of $A$, any basis of $X$ would need at least uncountably many basic open sets each containing just one of the uncountably many points of $A$. This is a contradiction because $X$ is second countable.