---
tags:
- math-147/7
- math-147/8
- top
---

Let $(X, \mathcal{T})$ be a topological space (unless otherwise stated)

A subbasis is not in fact a subset of a [[Topology --- math-147/notes/Bases#_definition _ basis|basis]] that is a basis of the same topology. Instead, it's a set of open sets that is allowed more ways to generate the topology.

##### _definition:_ subbasis

A subbasis for $\mathcal{T}$ is a collection of subsets $\mathcal{S}$ of $X$ such that the collection $\mathcal{B}$ of all finite (non-empty) intersections of sets in $\mathcal{S}$ is a basis for $\mathcal{T}$.

An element of $\mathcal{S}$ is called a subbasic open set.

##### _proposition:_ subbases generalise bases

A basis $\mathcal{S}$ for $\mathcal{T}$ is also a subbasis of $\mathcal{T}$.

###### _proof:_

The basis $\mathcal{S}$ is a subset of $\mathcal{T}$ and thus, contains only open sets. [[Topology --- math-147/notes/Topologies#_proposition _ finite intersections of open sets are open|Thus,]] the set $\mathcal{B}$ of all of its finite intersections are also a subset of $\mathcal{T}$. But since $\mathcal{B}$ contains all of $\mathcal{S}$ (each basic open set in $\mathcal{S}$ is the single finite intersection with itself), $\mathcal{B}$ must be a basis, and thus, $\mathcal{S}$ is a subbasis.

##### _example:_ the subbasis of rays on the Euclidean real line

The Euclidean topology on $\mathbb{R}$ is generated by the subbasis of all rays that look like $\{ x \in \mathbb{R} \mid x < a  \}$ or $\{ x \in \mathbb{R} \mid x > a \}$. Notice, that $\mathcal{S}$ only contains open sets, so we just have to verify that its set of finite intersections $\mathcal{B}$ contains a basis (we don't have to worry about it containing extraneous open sets).

Since the intersection of $\{ x \in \mathbb{R} \mid x < b \}$ and $\{ x \in \mathbb{R} \mid a < x \}$ is just $(a, b)$, $\mathcal{B}$ contains a basis of the Euclidean topology. Thus, $\mathcal{B}$ is a basis of the Euclidean topology, and $\mathcal{S}$ is a subbasis.

Similarly, there is a subbasis of the lower limit topology.

##### _example:_ the subbasis of rays on the lower limit topology

There is a subbasis $\mathcal{S}$ of the [[Topology --- math-147/notes/Bases#_example _ lower limit topology|lower limit topology]] $\mathbb{R}_{\text{LL}}$, consisting of closed positive-directed rays $\{ x \in \mathbb{R} \mid a \le x \}$ and open negative-directed rays $\{ x \in \mathbb{R} \mid x < b \}$. Notice that each of these is open in the lower limit topology.

##### _proposition:_ equivalent conditions to be a subbasis of a specific topology

$\mathcal{S}$ is a subbasis (with corresponding basis $\mathcal{B}$) for $\mathcal{T}$ on $X$, if and only if $\mathcal{S} \subseteq \mathcal{T}$ and each point $p$ in an open set $U$ has an open neighbourhood $V \in \mathcal{B}$ contained in $U$ ($V \subseteq U$).

###### _proof:_

Suppose $\mathcal{S}$ were a subbasis. Then since $\mathcal{B}$ is a basis, $\mathcal{B} \subseteq \mathcal{T}$, and thus, $\mathcal{S} \subseteq \mathcal{B} \subseteq \mathcal{T}$. Also, by definition of a basis, $U = \bigcup_{\alpha \in \mathcal{I}} V_{\alpha}$ for some collection of $V_{\alpha} \in \mathcal{B}$. There must be some $p \in V_{\alpha} \subseteq U$.

Suppose $\mathcal{S}$ satisfied the conditions. Since $\mathcal{S} \subseteq \mathcal{T}$, all finite intersections of $\mathcal{S}$ are open. That is, $\mathcal{B} \subseteq \mathcal{T}$. Further, since each point $p$ in an open set $U$ has a basic open neighbourhood $V_{p} \subseteq U$, $V_{p} \in \mathcal{B}$, we can write $U = \bigcap_{p \in U} V_{p}$. That is, $\mathcal{S}$ is a basis.

We also want a way to tell if the subbasis generates a topology at all. This requires shockingly little.

##### _proposition:_ equivalent conditions to be a subbasis of any topology

Suppose $\mathcal{S}$ is a collection of subsets of any set $X$. Then $\mathcal{S}$ is a subbasis of a topology on $X$ if each point $p \in X$ is contained in some subbasic open set.

###### _proof:_

Write $\mathcal{B}$ for the collection of finite intersections of subbasic open sets in $\mathcal{S}$. We will show $\mathcal{B}$ is a basis.

Suppose each $p$ is contained in a subbasic open set $U_{p}$. Then clearly, $\mathcal{B}$ has each $p \in X$ contained in a basic open set. Further, each intersection of basic open sets $U$ and $V$ is a basic open set (since finite intersections of finite intersections are just finite intersections of the original sets — $\left( \bigcap_{i = 1}^m U_{i} \right) \cap \left(  \bigcap_{i = m + 1}^n U_{i} \right) = \bigcap_{i = 1}^n U_{i}$). Thus, every $U \cap V$ is covered by basic open sets.

Suppose $\mathcal{S}$ is a subbasis of some topology. Since $X$ must be open, $X$ is the union of some collection of subbasic open sets, and thus, each $p \in X$ is contained in at least one of them.

Note that this requires us to exclude empty intersections from the basis generated by the subbasis. Otherwise, $\mathcal{S} = \{ \mathrm{Ø} \}$ would generate the indiscrete topology on $X$ despite containing none of the points of $X$.

### The order topology

One important example of a topology generated by a subbasis is the order topology —  we've already seen some examples of it!

##### _definition:_ order topology

Given a set $X$ totally ordered by $\le$, let $\mathcal{B}$ be the collection of all subsets of $X$ of one of the forms
$$
\{ x \in X \mid x < b \}, \{ x \in X \mid a < x \}, \{ x \in X \mid a < x <b \}
$$
for $a, b \in X$. Then $\mathcal{B}$ is a basis for a topology on $\mathcal{T}$ called the order topology on $X$.

##### _proposition:_ subbasis for the order topology

Given a set $X$ totally ordered by $\le$, the collection $\mathcal{S}$ of subsets of $X$ of one of the forms
$$
\{ x \in X \mid x < b \}, \{ x \in X \mid a < x \}
$$
for $a, b \in X$ is a subbasis for the order topology on $X$.

###### _proof sketch:_

The finite intersections of subbasic open sets are either "rays" themselves (in either direction), "open intervals", or empty. These are all in the basis $\mathcal{B}$ of the order topology.

For example, the Euclidean topology on $\mathbb{R}$ is just the order topology on $\mathbb{R}$.

##### _example:_ the order topology on $\mathbb{R}$

Each of the (canonical) basis elements of the order topology on $\mathbb{R}$ is open in the Euclidean topology, and the (open interval) basis of the Euclidean topology is open in the order topology. (Or use that we showed this for the ray subbasis of the order topology already).

We can push this further to lexicographical orders on [[Algebraic geometry --- rising-sea/notes/Categories, functors, and natural transformations#_example _ product|products]] —

##### _definition:_ lexicographical order

If $A$ and $B$ are totally ordered by $\leq_{A}$ and $\le_{B}$ respectively, the lexicographical order on their product is defined by $(a_{1}, b_{1}) < (a_{2}, b_{2})$ if $a_{1} < a_{2}$ or $a_{1} = a_{2}$ and $b_{1} < b_{2}$.

##### _example:_ the lexicographical order on the square

We can put the lexicographical order on the square $[0, 1] \times [0, 1]$ and imagine snaking through this. For example, all the union of all vertical rays $\{ (x_{0}, y) \mid y \in [0, 1] \}$ with $x_{0} < a$ is an open set, but also the union of all vertical rays with $x_{0} < a$ plus the vertical ray $\{ (a, y) \mid 0 \le y < b \}$ is open.

Also notice that for $(0, 1) \times (0, 1)$ the lexicographical order is strictly [[Topology --- math-147/notes/Bases#_definition _ strength of a topology, coarser, finer|stronger]] than the Euclidean topology since you can get every open ball by taking unions of vertical lines of the right size, however there is an open set $\{ (x_{0}, y) \mid a < y < b \}$ in the order topology that is not open in the Euclidean topology. That is, the product order doesn't generate the product topology of the order topologies.