---
tags:
- nt
- math-55a
lecture: math-55a-2
---


Learn how to draw $\bb{Z}$! Draw a $7$ and then vertically invert it and draw it again.

##### _theorem:_ the division algorithm

For any integers $a$ and $b$, when we divide $a$ by $b$ we get a unique quotient and remainder. That is, there exist unique integers $q, r$ such that
$$
a = bq + r
$$
where
$$
0 \le r < b.
$$

##### _proof sketch:_

$a$ has to live between some $qb$ and $(q + 1)b$.

##### _definition:_ divides, $\mid$

We say $b$ divides $a$, notated $b \mid a$, for integers $a, b$ if there is an integer $q$ such that $a = bq$.

##### _proposition:_ division is transitive

If $c \mid b$ and $b \mid a$, then $c \mid a$.

##### _proof:_

Since $c \mid b$, $b = c q_1$ and $b \mid a$ gives us $a = b q_2$ which gives us $a = c q_1 q_2$, and thus $c \mid a$.

##### _theorem:_ integer combination theorem

If $d \mid a$ and $d \mid b$, then $d \mid ax + by$ for any $x, y \in \bb{Z}$.

##### _proof:_

Since $d$ divides $a$ and $b$ we must have $q_1 d = a$ and $q_2 d = b$. 

Thus,
$$
ax + by = d(q_1 x + q_2 y)
$$
giving us $d \mid ax + by$ as desired.


### Greatest common divisors


##### _definition:_ greatest common divisor, $\gcd$ 

For any two integers $a$ and $b$, we say that is the greatest natural number $d$ such that $d \mid a$ and $d \mid b$. We write $\gcd(a, b) = d$.

Note that this well defined since the set of "common divisors" of $a$ and $b$ is nonempty ($1$ divides all natural numbers), and is bounded since no common divisor of $a$ and $b$ can be greater than $\min(\abs{a}, \abs{b})$.

##### _definition:_ relatively prime

We say two integers $a$ and $b$ are relatively prime if $\gcd(a, b) = 1$
##### _notation:_ $(a, b)$

Sometimes we're lazy and so we write $(a, b)$ for $\gcd(a, b)$.

This is because the ideal generated by $a$ and $b$ is the ideal generated by $\gcd(a, b)$ (in the integers and particularly nice rings).

##### _lemma:_ small numbers divide big numbers

For positive integers $d$ and $a$, if $d|a$, then $d \le a$.

##### _proof:_

Suppose $d|a$ for $d, a \in \bb{N}$. Then $d = qa$ for some $q \ge 1$. Thus, $d \ge 1 \times a = a$.

##### _theorem:_ Bezout's theorem

For integers $a, b$, $\gcd{(a, b)}$ is an integer combination of $a$ and $b$. That is, there exist $x, y \in \bb{Z}$ such that $ax + by = \gcd{(a, b)}$. Specifically, $\gcd{(a, b)}$ is the least such positive integer combination.

##### _proof:_

Let $g = \gcd{(a, b)}$. Let $l = a x_0 + b y_0$, the smallest positive integer combination of $a$ and $b$.

Note that $g|l$ since $g|a$ and $g|b$. Thus, $g \le l$.

Note that we must have $l|a$ and $l|b$ since if we didn't we would have the following contradiction. If $l$ doesn't divide $a$ (without loss of generality). Then by the division algorithm we get
$$
a = lq + r
$$
with $0 < r < l$.

But then $r = a - lq = a - q(a x_0 - b y_0) = a(1 - q x_0) + b (q y_0)$ which is just an integer combination of $a$ and $b$. Then we have a positive integer combination of $a$ and $b$ less than $l$ which is a contradiction!

Thus, $l$ must divide both $a$ and $b$, and then, by the definition of $\gcd$, $l \le g$.

Thus, $l = g$.

##### _corollary:_ relative prime numbers have unit linear combinations

Integers $a$ and $b$ are relatively prime if and only if there exist $x, y \in \bb{Z}$ such that $ax + by = 1$.